The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Complete PG Works of Oliver Wendell
Holmes, Sr., by Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr. (The Physician and Poet not the Jurist)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Complete PG Works of Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr.

Author: Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr. (The Physician and Poet not the Jurist)

Release Date: October 20, 2004 [EBook #3252]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PG WORKS OF O.W. HOLMES ***




Produced by David Widger and Several Other Project Gutenberg Volunteers





THE ENTIRE PROJECT GUTENBERG WORKS OF OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES, SR.

By Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.



CONTENTS:

The Autocrat of the Breakfast-table
The Professor at the Breakfast-table
The Poet at the Breakfast Table
Over the Teacups
Elsie Venner
The Guardian Angel
A Mortal Antipathy
Pages from an Old Volume of Life
     Bread and the Newspaper
     My Hunt after "The Captain"
     The Inevitable Trial
     Cinders from Ashes
     The Pulpit and the Pew
Medical Essays
     Homeopathy and its Kindred Delusions
     The Contagiousness of Puerperal Fever
     Currents and Counter-currents in Medical Science
     Border Lines of Knowledge in Some Provinces of Medical Science
     Scholastic and Bedside Teaching
     The Medical Profession in Massachusetts
     The Young Practitioner
     Medical Libraries
     Some of My Early Teachers
A Memoir of John Lothrop Motley
A Memoir of Ralph Waldo Emerson
Our Hundred Days in Europe





THE AUTOCRAT OF THE BREAKFAST-TABLE


THE AUTOCRAT'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY


The interruption referred to in the first sentence of the first of
these papers was just a quarter of a century in duration.

Two articles entitled "The Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table" will be
found in the "New England Magazine," formerly published in Boston
by J. T. and E. Buckingham.  The date of the first of these
articles is November 1831, and that of the second February 1832.
When "The Atlantic Monthly" was begun, twenty-five years
afterwards, and the author was asked to write for it, the
recollection of these crude products of his uncombed literary
boyhood suggested the thought that it would be a curious experiment
to shake the same bough again, and see if the ripe fruit were
better or worse than the early windfalls.

So began this series of papers, which naturally brings those
earlier attempts to my own notice and that of some few friends who
were idle enough to read them at the time of their publication.
The man is father to the boy that was, and I am my own son, as it
seems to me, in those papers of the New England Magazine.  If I
find it hard to pardon the boy's faults, others would find it
harder.  They will not, therefore, be reprinted here, nor as I
hope, anywhere.

But a sentence or two from them will perhaps bear reproducing, and
with these I trust the gentle reader, if that kind being still
breathes, will be contented.


--"It is a capital plan to carry a tablet with you, and, when you
find yourself felicitous, take notes of your own conversation."--

--"When I feel inclined to read poetry I take down my Dictionary.
The poetry of words is quite as beautiful as that of sentences.
The author may arrange the gems effectively, but their fhape and
luftre have been given by the attrition of ages.  Bring me the
fineft fimile from the whole range of imaginative writing, and I
will fhow you a fingle word which conveys a more profound, a more
accurate, and a more eloquent analogy."--

--"Once on a time, a notion was ftarted, that if all the people in
the world would fhout at once, it might be heard in the moon.  So
the projectors agreed it fhould be done in juft ten years.  Some
thousand fhip-loads of chronometers were diftributed to the
selectmen and other great folks of all the different nations.  For
a year beforehand, nothing else was talked about but the awful
noise that was to be made on the great occafion.  When the time
came, everybody had their ears so wide open, to hear the universal
ejaculation of BOO,--the word agreed upon,--that nobody spoke
except a deaf man in one of the Fejee Islands, and a woman in
Pekin, so that the world was never so ftill fince the creation."--


There was nothing better than these things and there was not a
little that was much worse.  A young fellow of two or three and
twenty has as good a right to spoil a magazine-full of essays in
learning how to write, as an oculist like Wenzel had to spoil his
hat-full of eyes in learning how to operate for cataract, or an
ELEGANT like Brummel to point to an armful of failures in the
attempt to achieve a perfect tie.  This son of mine, whom I have
not seen for these twenty-five years, generously counted, was a
self-willed youth, always too ready to utter his unchastised
fancies.  He, like too many American young people, got the spur
when he should have had the rein.  He therefore helped to fill the
market with that unripe fruit which his father says in one of these
papers abounds in the marts of his native country.  All these
by-gone shortcomings he would hope are forgiven, did he not feel sure
that very few of his readers know anything about them.  In taking
the old name for the new papers, he felt bound to say that he had
uttered unwise things under that title, and if it shall appear that
his unwisdom has not diminished by at least half while his years
have doubled, he promises not to repeat the experiment if he should
live to double them again and become his own grandfather.

OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.
BOSTON.  Nov. 1st 1858.



CHAPTER I



I was just going to say, when I was interrupted, that one of the
many ways of classifying minds is under the heads of arithmetical
and algebraical intellects.  All economical and practical wisdom is
an extension or variation of the following arithmetical formula:
2+2=4.  Every philosophical proposition has the more general
character of the expression a+b=c.  We are mere operatives,
empirics, and egotists, until we learn to think in letters instead
of figures.

They all stared.  There is a divinity student lately come among us
to whom I commonly address remarks like the above, allowing him to
take a certain share in the conversation, so far as assent or
pertinent questions are involved.  He abused his liberty on this
occasion by presuming to say that Leibnitz had the same
observation.--No, sir, I replied, he has not.  But he said a mighty
good thing about mathematics, that sounds something like it, and
you found it, NOT IN THE ORIGINAL, but quoted by Dr. Thomas Reid.
I will tell the company what he did say, one of these days.

--If I belong to a Society of Mutual Admiration?--I blush to say
that I do not at this present moment.  I once did, however.  It was
the first association to which I ever heard the term applied; a
body of scientific young men in a great foreign city who admired
their teacher, and to some extent each other.  Many of them
deserved it; they have become famous since.  It amuses me to hear
the talk of one of those beings described by Thackeray--


"Letters four do form his name"--


about a social development which belongs to the very noblest stage
of civilization.  All generous companies of artists, authors,
philanthropists, men of science, are, or ought to be, Societies of
Mutual Admiration.  A man of genius, or any kind of superiority, is
not debarred from admiring the same quality in another, nor the
other from returning his admiration.  They may even associate
together and continue to think highly of each other.  And so of a
dozen such men, if any one place is fortunate enough to hold so
many.  The being referred to above assumes several false premises.
First, that men of talent necessarily hate each other.  Secondly,
that intimate knowledge or habitual association destroys our
admiration of persons whom we esteemed highly at a distance.
Thirdly, that a circle of clever fellows, who meet together to dine
and have a good time, have signed a constitutional compact to
glorify themselves and to put down him and the fraction of the
human race not belonging to their number.  Fourthly, that it is an
outrage that he is not asked to join them.

Here the company laughed a good deal, and the old gentleman who
sits opposite said, "That's it! that's it!"

I continued, for I was in the talking vein.  As to clever people's
hating each other, I think a LITTLE extra talent does sometimes
make people jealous.  They become irritated by perpetual attempts
and failures, and it hurts their tempers and dispositions.
Unpretending mediocrity is good, and genius is glorious; but a weak
flavor of genius in an essentially common person is detestable.  It
spoils the grand neutrality of a commonplace character, as the
rinsings of an unwashed wineglass spoil a draught of fair water.
No wonder the poor fellow we spoke of, who always belongs to this
class of slightly flavored mediocrities, is puzzled and vexed by
the strange sight of a dozen men of capacity working and playing
together in harmony.  He and his fellows are always fighting.  With
them familiarity naturally breeds contempt.  If they ever praise
each other's bad drawings, or broken-winded novels, or spavined
verses, nobody ever supposed it was from admiration; it was simply
a contract between themselves and a publisher or dealer.

If the Mutuals have really nothing among them worth admiring, that
alters the question.  But if they are men with noble powers and
qualities, let me tell you, that, next to youthful love and family
affections, there is no human sentiment better than that which
unites the Societies of Mutual Admiration.  And what would
literature or art be without such associations?  Who can tell what
we owe to the Mutual Admiration Society of which Shakspeare, and
Ben Jonson, and Beaumont and Fletcher were members?  Or to that of
which Addison and Steele formed the centre, and which gave us the
Spectator?  Or to that where Johnson, and Goldsmith, and Burke, and
Reynolds, and Beauclerk, and Boswell, most admiring among all
admirers, met together?  Was there any great harm in the fact that
the Irvings and Paulding wrote in company? or any unpardonable
cabal in the literary union of Verplanck and Bryant and Sands, and
as many more as they chose to associate with them?

The poor creature does not know what he is talking about, when he
abuses this noblest of institutions.  Let him inspect its mysteries
through the knot-hole he has secured, but not use that orifice as a
medium for his popgun.  Such a society is the crown of a literary
metropolis; if a town has not material for it, and spirit and good
feeling enough to organize it, it is a mere caravansary, fit for a
man of genius to lodge in, but not to live in.  Foolish people hate
and dread and envy such an association of men of varied powers and
influence, because it is lofty, serene, impregnable, and, by the
necessity of the case, exclusive.  Wise ones are prouder of the
title M. S. M. A. than of all their other honors put together.

--All generous minds have a horror of what are commonly called
"facts."  They are the brute beasts of the intellectual domain.
Who does not know fellows that always have an ill-conditioned fact
or two which they lead after them into decent company like so many
bull-dogs, ready to let them slip at every ingenious suggestion, or
convenient generalization, or pleasant fancy?  I allow no "facts"
at this table.  What!  Because bread is good and wholesome and
necessary and nourishing, shall you thrust a crumb into my windpipe
while I am talking?  Do not these muscles of mine represent a
hundred loaves of bread? and is not my thought the abstract of ten
thousand of these crumbs of truth with which you would choke off my
speech?

[The above remark must be conditioned and qualified for the vulgar
mind.  The reader will of course understand the precise amount of
seasoning which must be added to it before he adopts it as one of
the axioms of his life.  The speaker disclaims all responsibility
for its abuse in incompetent hands.]

This business of conversation is a very serious matter.  There are
men that it weakens one to talk with an hour more than a day's
fasting would do.  Mark this that I am going to say, for it is as
good as a working professional man's advice, and costs you nothing:
It is better to lose a pint of blood from your veins than to have a
nerve tapped.  Nobody measures your nervous force as it runs away,
nor bandages your brain and marrow after the operation.

There are men of esprit who are excessively exhausting to some
people.  They are the talkers who have what may be called JERKY
minds.  Their thoughts do not run in the natural order of sequence.
They say bright things on all possible subjects, but their zigzags
rack you to death.  After a jolting half-hour with one of these
jerky companions, talking with a dull friend affords great relief.
It is like taking the cat in your lap after holding a squirrel.

What a comfort a dull but kindly person is, to be sure, at times!
A ground-glass shade over a gas-lamp does not bring more solace to
our dazzled eyes than such a one to our minds.

"Do not dull people bore you?" said one of the lady-boarders,--the
same that sent me her autograph-book last week with a request for a
few original stanzas, not remembering that "The Pactolian" pays me
five dollars a line for every thing I write in its columns.

"Madam," said I, (she and the century were in their teens
together,) "all men are bores, except when we want them.  There
never was but one man whom I would trust with my latch-key."

"Who might that favored person be?"

"Zimmermann."

--The men of genius that I fancy most have erectile heads like the
cobra-di-capello.  You remember what they tell of William Pinkney,
the great pleader; how in his eloquent paroxysms the veins of his
neck would swell and his face flush and his eyes glitter, until he
seemed on the verge of apoplexy.  The hydraulic arrangements for
supplying the brain with blood are only second in importance to its
own organization.  The bulbous-headed fellows that steam well when
they are at work are the men that draw big audiences and give us
marrowy books and pictures.  It is a good sign to have one's feet
grow cold when he is writing.  A great writer and speaker once told
me that he often wrote with his feet in hot water; but for this,
ALL his blood would have run into his head, as the mercury
sometimes withdraws into the ball of a thermometer.

--You don't suppose that my remarks made at this table are like so
many postage-stamps, do you,--each to be only once uttered?  If you
do, you are mistaken.  He must be a poor creature that does not
often repeat himself.  Imagine the author of the excellent piece of
advice, "Know thyself," never alluding to that sentiment again
during the course of a protracted existence!  Why, the truths a man
carries about with him are his tools; and do you think a carpenter
is bound to use the same plane but once to smooth a knotty board
with, or to hang up his hammer after it has driven its first nail?
I shall never repeat a conversation, but an idea often.  I shall
use the same types when I like, but not commonly the same
stereotypes.  A thought is often original, though you have uttered
it a hundred times.  It has come to you over a new route, by a new
and express train of associations.

Sometimes, but rarely, one may be caught making the same speech
twice over, and yet be held blameless.  Thus, a certain lecturer,
after performing in an inland city, where dwells a Litteratrice of
note, was invited to meet her and others over the social teacup.
She pleasantly referred to his many wanderings in his new
occupation.  "Yes," he replied, "I am like the Huma, the bird that
never lights, being always in the cars, as he is always on the
wing."--Years elapsed.  The lecturer visited the same place once
more for the same purpose.  Another social cup after the lecture,
and a second meeting with the distinguished lady.  "You are
constantly going from place to place," she said.--"Yes," he
answered, "I am like the Huma,"--and finished the sentence as
before.

What horrors, when it flashed over him that he had made this fine
speech, word for word, twice over!  Yet it was not true, as the
lady might perhaps have fairly inferred, that he had embellished
his conversation with the Huma daily during that whole interval of
years.  On the contrary, he had never once thought of the odious
fowl until the recurrence of precisely the same circumstances
brought up precisely the same idea.  He ought to have been proud of
the accuracy of his mental adjustments.  Given certain factors, and
a sound brain should always evolve the same fixed product with the
certainty of Babbage's calculating machine.

--What a satire, by the way, is that machine on the mere
mathematician!  A Frankenstein-monster, a thing without brains and
without heart, too stupid to make a blunder; that turns out results
like a corn-sheller, and never grows any wiser or better, though it
grind a thousand bushels of them!

I have an immense respect for a man of talents PLUS "the
mathematics."  But the calculating power alone should seem to be
the least human of qualities, and to have the smallest amount of
reason in it; since a machine can be made to do the work of three
or four calculators, and better than any one of them.  Sometimes I
have been troubled that I had not a deeper intuitive apprehension
of the relations of numbers.  But the triumph of the ciphering
hand-organ has consoled me.  I always fancy I can hear the wheels
clicking in a calculator's brain.  The power of dealing with
numbers is a kind of "detached lever" arrangement, which may be put
into a mighty poor watch--I suppose it is about as common as the
power of moving the ears voluntarily, which is a moderately rare
endowment.

--Little localized powers, and little narrow streaks of specialized
knowledge, are things men are very apt to be conceited about.
Nature is very wise; but for this encouraging principle how many
small talents and little accomplishments would be neglected!  Talk
about conceit as much as you like, it is to human character what
salt is to the ocean; it keeps it sweet, and renders it endurable.
Say rather it is like the natural unguent of the sea-fowl's
plumage, which enables him to shed the rain that falls on him and
the wave in which he dips.  When one has had ALL his conceit taken
out of him, when he has lost ALL his illusions, his feathers will
soon soak through, and he will fly no more.

"So you admire conceited people, do you?" said the young lady who
has come to the city to be finished off for--the duties of life.

I am afraid you do not study logic at your school, my dear.  It
does not follow that I wish to be pickled in brine because I like a
salt-water plunge at Nahant.  I say that conceit is just as
natural a thing to human minds as a centre is to a circle.  But
little-minded people's thoughts move in such small circles that five
minutes' conversation gives you an arc long enough to determine
their whole curve.  An arc in the movement of a large intellect
does not sensibly differ from a straight line.  Even if it have the
third vowel as its centre, it does not soon betray it.  The highest
thought, that is, is the most seemingly impersonal; it does not
obviously imply any individual centre.

Audacious self-esteem, with good ground for it, is always imposing.
What resplendent beauty that must have been which could have
authorized Phryne to "peel" in the way she did!  What fine speeches
are those two:  "Non omnis mortar," and "I have taken all knowledge
to be my province"!  Even in common people, conceit has the virtue
of making them cheerful; the man who thinks his wife, his baby, his
house, his horse, his dog, and himself severally unequalled, is
almost sure to be a good-humored person, though liable to be
tedious at times.

--What are the great faults of conversation?  Want of ideas, want
of words, want of manners, are the principal ones, I suppose you
think.  I don't doubt it, but I will tell you what I have found
spoil more good talks than anything else;--long arguments on
special points between people who differ on the fundamental
principles upon which these points depend.  No men can have
satisfactory relations with each other until they have agreed on
certain ultimata of belief not to be disturbed in ordinary
conversation, and unless they have sense enough to trace the
secondary questions depending upon these ultimate beliefs to their
source.  In short, just as a written constitution is essential to
the best social order, so a code of finalities is a necessary
condition of profitable talk between two persons.  Talking is like
playing on the harp; there is as much in laying the hand on the
strings to stop their vibrations as in twanging them to bring out
their music.

--Do you mean to say the pun-question is not clearly settled in
your minds?  Let me lay down the law upon the subject.  Life and
language are alike sacred.  Homicide and verbicide--that is,
violent treatment of a word with fatal results to its legitimate
meaning, which is its life--are alike forbidden.  Manslaughter,
which is the meaning of the one, is the same as man's laughter,
which is the end of the other.  A pun is prima facie an insult to
the person you are talking with.  It implies utter indifference to
or sublime contempt for his remarks, no matter how serious.  I
speak of total depravity, and one says all that is written on the
subject is deep raving.  I have committed my self-respect by
talking with such a person.  I should like to commit him, but
cannot, because he is a nuisance.  Or I speak of geological
convulsions, and he asks me what was the cosine of Noah's ark;
also, whether the Deluge was not a deal huger than any modern
inundation.

A pun does not commonly justify a blow in return.  But if a blow
were given for such cause, and death ensued, the jury would be
judges both of the facts and of the pun, and might, if the latter
were of an aggravated character, return a verdict of justifiable
homicide.  Thus, in a case lately decided before Miller, J., Doe
presented Roe a subscription paper, and urged the claims of
suffering humanity.  Roe replied by asking, When charity was like a
top?  It was in evidence that Doe preserved a dignified silence.
Roe then said, "When it begins to hum."  Doe then--and not till
then--struck Roe, and his head happening to hit a bound volume of
the Monthly Rag-bag and Stolen Miscellany, intense mortification
ensued, with a fatal result.  The chief laid down his notions of
the law to his brother justices, who unanimously replied, "Jest
so."  The chief rejoined, that no man should jest so without being
punished for it, and charged for the prisoner, who was acquitted,
and the pun ordered to be burned by the sheriff.  The bound volume
was forfeited as a deodand, but not claimed.

People that make puns are like wanton boys that put coppers on the
railroad tracks.  They amuse themselves and other children, but
their little trick may upset a freight train of conversation for
the sake of a battered witticism.

I will thank you, B. F., to bring down two books, of which I will
mark the places on this slip of paper.  (While he is gone, I may
say that this boy, our land-lady's youngest, is called BENJAMIN
FRANKLIN, after the celebrated philosopher of that name.  A highly
merited compliment.)

I wished to refer to two eminent authorities.  Now be so good as to
listen.  The great moralist says:  "To trifle with the vocabulary
which is the vehicle of social intercourse is to tamper with the
currency of human intelligence.  He who would violate the
sanctities of his mother tongue would invade the recesses of the
paternal till without remorse, and repeat the banquet of Saturn
without an indigestion."

And, once more, listen to the historian.  "The Puritans hated puns.
The Bishops were notoriously addicted to them.  The Lords Temporal
carried them to the verge of license.  Majesty itself must have its
Royal quibble.  'Ye be burly, my Lord of Burleigh,' said Queen
Elizabeth, 'but ye shall make less stir in our realm than my Lord
of Leicester.'  The gravest wisdom and the highest breeding lent
their sanction to the practice.  Lord Bacon playfully declared
himself a descendant of 'Og, the King of Bashan.  Sir Philip
Sidney, with his last breath, reproached the soldier who brought
him water, for wasting a casque full upon a dying man.  A courtier,
who saw Othello performed at the Globe Theatre, remarked, that the
blackamoor was a brute, and not a man.  'Thou hast reason,' replied
a great Lord, 'according to Plato his saying; for this be a
two-legged animal WITH feathers.'  The fatal habit became universal.
The language was corrupted.  The infection spread to the national
conscience.  Political double-dealings naturally grew out of verbal
double meanings.  The teeth of the new dragon were sown by the
Cadmus who introduced the alphabet of equivocation.  What was
levity in the time of the Tudors grew to regicide and revolution in
the age of the Stuarts."

Who was that boarder that just whispered something about the
Macaulay-flowers of literature?--There was a dead silence.--I said
calmly, I shall henceforth consider any interruption by a pun as a
hint to change my boarding-house.  Do not plead my example.  If _I_
have used any such, it has been only as a Spartan father would show
up a drunken helot.  We have done with them.

--If a logical mind ever found out anything with its logic?--I
should say that its most frequent work was to build a pons asinorum
over chasms which shrewd people can bestride without such a
structure.  You can hire logic, in the shape of a lawyer, to prove
anything that you want to prove.  You can buy treatises to show
that Napoleon never lived, and that no battle of Bunker-hill was
ever fought.  The great minds are those with a wide span, which
couple truths related to, but far removed from, each other.
Logicians carry the surveyor's chain over the track of which these
are the true explorers.  I value a man mainly for his primary
relations with truth, as I understand truth,--not for any secondary
artifice in handling his ideas.  Some of the sharpest men in
argument are notoriously unsound in judgment.  I should not trust
the counsel of a smart debater, any more than that of a good
chess-player.  Either may of course advise wisely, but not
necessarily because he wrangles or plays well.

The old gentleman who sits opposite got his hand up, as a pointer
lifts his forefoot, at the expression, "his relations with truth,
as I understand truth," and when I had done, sniffed audibly, and
said I talked like a transcendentalist.  For his part, common sense
was good enough for him.

Precisely so, my dear sir, I replied; common sense, AS YOU
UNDERSTAND IT.  We all have to assume a standard of judgment in our
own minds, either of things or persons.  A man who is willing to
take another's opinion has to exercise his judgment in the choice
of whom to follow, which is often as nice a matter as to judge of
things for one's self.  On the whole, I had rather judge men's
minds by comparing their thoughts with my own, than judge of
thoughts by knowing who utter them.  I must do one or the other.
It does not follow, of course, that I may not recognize another
man's thoughts as broader and deeper than my own; but that does not
necessarily change my opinion, otherwise this would be at the mercy
of every superior mind that held a different one.  How many of our
most cherished beliefs are like those drinking-glasses of the
ancient pattern, that serve us well so long as we keep them in our
hand, but spill all if we attempt to set them down!  I have
sometimes compared conversation to the Italian game of mora, in
which one player lifts his hand with so many fingers extended, and
the other gives the number if he can.  I show my thought, another
his; if they agree, well; if they differ, we find the largest
common factor, if we can, but at any rate avoid disputing about
remainders and fractions, which is to real talk what tuning an
instrument is to playing on it.

--What if, instead of talking this morning, I should read you a
copy of verses, with critical remarks by the author?  Any of the
company can retire that like.


ALBUM VERSES.


When Eve had led her lord away,
And Cain had killed his brother,
The stars and flowers, the poets say,
Agreed with one another

To cheat the cunning tempter's art,
And teach the race its duty,
By keeping on its wicked heart
Their eyes of light and beauty.

A million sleepless lids, they say,
Will be at least a warning;
And so the flowers would watch by day,
The stars from eve to morning.

On hill and prairie, field and lawn,
Their dewy eyes upturning,
The flowers still watch from reddening dawn
Till western skies are burning.

Alas! each hour of daylight tells
A tale of shame so crushing,
That some turn white as sea-bleached shells,
And some are always blushing.

But when the patient stars look down
On all their light discovers,
The traitor's smile, the murderer's frown,
The lips of lying lovers,

They try to shut their saddening eyes,
And in the vain endeavour
We see them twinkling in the skies,
And so they wink forever.


What do YOU think of these verses my friends?--Is that piece an
impromptu? said my landlady's daughter.  (Aet. 19 +.  Tender-eyed
blonde.  Long ringlets.  Cameo pin.  Gold pencil-case on a chain.
Locket.  Bracelet.  Album.  Autograph book.  Accordeon.  Reads
Byron, Tupper, and Sylvanus Cobb, junior, while her mother makes
the puddings.  Says "Yes?" when you tell her anything.)--Oui et
non, ma petite,--Yes and no, my child.  Five of the seven verses
were written off-hand; the other two took a week,--that is, were
hanging round the desk in a ragged, forlorn, unrhymed condition as
long as that.  All poets will tell you just such stories.  C'est le
DERNIER pas qui coute.  Don't you know how hard it is for some
people to get out of a room after their visit is really over?  They
want to be off, and you want to have them off, but they don't know
how to manage it.  One would think they had been built in your
parlour or study, and were waiting to be launched.  I have
contrived a sort of ceremonial inclined plane for such visitors,
which being lubricated with certain smooth phrases, I back them
down, metaphorically speaking, stern-foremost, into their "native
element," the great ocean of out-doors.  Well, now, there are poems
as hard to get rid of as these rural visitors.  They come in
glibly, use up all the serviceable rhymes, DAY, RAY, BEAUTY, DUTY,
SKIES, EYES, OTHER, BROTHER, MOUNTAIN, FOUNTAIN, and the like; and
so they go on until you think it is time for the wind-up, and the
wind-up won't come on any terms.  So they lie about until you get
sick of the sight of them, and end by thrusting some cold scrap of
a final couplet upon them, and turning them out of doors.  I
suspect a good many "impromptus" could tell just such a story as
the above.--Here turning to our landlady, I used an illustration
which pleased the company much at the time, and has since been
highly commanded.  "Madam," I said, "you can pour three gills and
three quarters of honey from that pint jug, if it is full, in less
than one minute; but, Madam, you could not empty that last quarter
of a gill, though you were turned into a marble Hebe, and held the
vessel upside down for a thousand years.

One gets tired to death of the old, old rhymes, such as you see in
that copy of verses,--which I don't mean to abuse, or to praise
either.  I always feel as if I were a cobbler, putting new
top-leathers to an old pair of boot-soles and bodies, when I am
fitting sentiments to these venerable jingles.

     .    .    .    .    youth
.    .    .    .    .    morning
.    .    .    .    .    truth
.    .    .    .    .    warning

Nine tenths of the "Juvenile Poems" written spring out of the above
musical and suggestive coincidences.

"Yes?" said our landlady's daughter.

I did not address the following remark to her, and I trust, from
her limited range of reading, she will never see it; I said it
softly to my next neighbour.

When a young female wears a flat circular side--curl, gummed on
each temple,--when she walks with a male, not arm in arm, but his
arm against the back of hers,--and when she says "Yes?" with the
note of interrogation, you are generally safe in asking her what
wages she gets, and who the "feller" was you saw her with.

"What were you whispering?" said the daughter of the house,
moistening her lips, as she spoke, in a very engaging manner.

"I was only laying down a principle of social diagnosis."

"Yes?"

--It is curious to see how the same wants and tastes find the same
implements and modes of expression in all times and places.  The
young ladies of Otaheite, as you may see in Cook's Voyages, had a
sort of crinoline arrangement fully equal in radius to the largest
spread of our own lady-baskets.  When I fling a Bay-State shawl
over my shoulders, I am only taking a lesson from the climate that
the Indian had learned before me.  A BLANKET-shawl we call it, and
not a plaid; and we wear it like the aborigines, and not like the
Highlanders.

--We are the Romans of the modern world,--the great assimilating
people.  Conflicts and conquests are of course necessary accidents
with us, as with our prototypes.  And so we come to their style of
weapon.  Our army sword is the short, stiff, pointed gladius of the
Romans; and the American bowie-knife is the same tool, modified to
meet the daily wants of civil society.  I announce at this table an
axiom not to be found in Montesquieu or the journals of Congress:-


The race that shortens its weapons lengthens its boundaries.


Corollary.  It was the Polish LANCE that left Poland at last with
nothing of her own to bound.


"Dropped from her nerveless grasp the SHATTERED SPEAR!"


What business had Sarmatia to be fighting for liberty with a
fifteen-foot pole between her and the breasts of her enemies?  If
she had but clutched the old Roman and young American weapon, and
come to close quarters, there might have been a chance for her; but
it would have spoiled the best passage in "The Pleasures of Hope."

--Self-made men?--Well, yes.  Of course everybody likes and
respects self-made men.  It is a great deal better to be made in
that way than not to be made at all.  Are any of you younger people
old enough to remember that Irishman's house on the marsh at
Cambridgeport, which house he built from drain to chimney-top with
his own hands?  It took him a good many years to build it, and one
could see that it was a little out of plumb, and a little wavy in
outline, and a little queer and uncertain in general aspect.  A
regular hand could certainly have built a better house; but it was
a very good house for a "self-made" carpenter's house, and people
praised it, and said how remarkably well the Irishman had
succeeded.  They never thought of praising the fine blocks of
houses a little farther on.

Your self-made man, whittled into shape with his own jack-knife,
deserves more credit, if that is all, than the regular
engine-turned article, shaped by the most approved pattern, and
French-polished by society and travel.  But as to saying that one is
every way the equal of the other, that is another matter.  The right
of strict social discrimination of all things and persons, according
to their merits, native or acquired, is one of the most precious
republican privileges.  I take the liberty to exercise it, when I say,
that, OTHER THINGS BEING EQUAL, in most relations of life I prefer a
man of family.

What do I mean by a man of family?--O, I'll give you a general idea
of what I mean.  Let us give him a first-rate fit out; it costs us
nothing.

Four or five generations of gentlemen and gentlewomen; among them a
member of his Majesty's Council for the Province, a Governor or so,
one or two Doctors of Divinity, a member of Congress, not later
than the time of top-boots with tassels.

Family portraits.  The member of the Council, by Smibert.  The
great merchant-uncle, by Copley, full length, sitting in his
arm-chair, in a velvet cap and flowered robe, with a globe by him,
to show the range of his commercial transactions, and letters with
large red seals lying round, one directed conspicuously to The
Honourable etc. etc.  Great-grandmother, by the same artist; brown
satin, lace very fine, hands superlative; grand old lady, stiffish,
but imposing.  Her mother, artist unknown; flat, angular, hanging
sleeves; parrot on fist.  A pair of Stuarts, viz., 1.  A superb
full-blown, mediaeval gentleman, with a fiery dash of Tory blood in
his veins, tempered down with that of a fine old rebel grandmother,
and warmed up with the best of old India Madeira; his face is one
flame of ruddy sunshine; his ruffled shirt rushes out of his bosom
with an impetuous generosity, as if it would drag his heart after
it; and his smile is good for twenty thousand dollars to the
Hospital, besides ample bequests to all relatives and dependants.
2.  Lady of the same; remarkable cap; high waist, as in time of
Empire; bust a la Josephine; wisps of curls, like celery-tips, at
sides of forehead; complexion clear and warm, like rose-cordial.
As for the miniatures by Malbone, we don't count them in the
gallery.

Books, too, with the names of old college-students in them,--family
names;--you will find them at the head of their respective classes
in the days when students took rank on the catalogue from their
parents' condition.  Elzevirs, with the Latinized appellations of
youthful progenitors, and Hic liber est meus on the title-page.  A
set of Hogarth's original plates.  Pope, original edition, 15
volumes, London, 1717.  Barrow on the lower shelves, in folio.
Tillotson on the upper, in a little dark platoon of octo-decimos.

Some family silver; a string of wedding and funeral rings; the arms
of the family curiously blazoned; the same in worsted, by a maiden
aunt.

If the man of family has an old place to keep these things in,
furnished with claw-footed chairs and black mahogany tables, and
tall bevel-edged mirrors, and stately upright cabinets, his outfit
is complete.

No, my friends, I go (always, other things being equal) for the man
who inherits family traditions and the cumulative humanities of at
least four or five generations.  Above all things, as a child, he
should have tumbled about in a library.  All men are afraid of
books, who have not handled them from infancy.  Do you suppose our
dear didascalos over there ever read Poli Synopsis, or consulted
Castelli Lexicon, while he was growing up to their stature?  Not
he; but virtue passed through the hem of their parchment and
leather garments whenever he touched them, as the precious drugs
sweated through the bat's handle in the Arabian story.  I tell you
he is at home wherever he smells the invigorating fragrance of
Russia leather.  No self-made man feels so.  One may, it is true,
have all the antecedents I have spoken of, and yet be a boor or a
shabby fellow.  One may have none of them, and yet be fit for
councils and courts.  Then let them change places.  Our social
arrangement has this great beauty, that its strata shift up and
down as they change specific gravity, without being clogged by
layers of prescription.  But I still insist on my democratic
liberty of choice, and I go for the man with the gallery of family
portraits against the one with the twenty-five-cent daguerreotype,
unless I find out that the last is the better of the two.

--I should have felt more nervous about the late comet, if I had
thought the world was ripe.  But it is very green yet, if I am not
mistaken; and besides, there is a great deal of coal to use up,
which I cannot bring myself to think was made for nothing.  If
certain things, which seem to me essential to a millennium, had
come to pass, I should have been frightened; but they haven't.
Perhaps you would like to hear my


LATTER-DAY WARNINGS.


When legislators keep the law,
When banks dispense with bolts and locks,
When berries, whortle--rasp--and straw--
Grow bigger DOWNWARDS through the box,--

When he that selleth house or land
Shows leak in roof or flaw in right,--
When haberdashers choose the stand
Whose window hath the broadest light,--

When preachers tell us all they think,
And party leaders all they mean,--
When what we pay for, that we drink,
From real grape and coffee-bean,--

When lawyers take what they would give,
And doctors give what they would take,--
When city fathers eat to live,
Save when they fast for conscience' sake,--

When one that hath a horse on sale
Shall bring his merit to the proof,
Without a lie for every nail
That holds the iron on the hoof,--

When in the usual place for rips
Our gloves are stitched with special care,
And guarded well the whalebone tips
Where first umbrellas need repair,--

When Cuba's weeds have quite forgot
The power of suction to resist,
And claret-bottles harber not
Such dimples as would hold your fist,--

When publishers no longer steal,
And pay for what they stole before,--
When the first locomotive's wheel
Rolls through the Hoosac tunnel's bore;--

TILL then let Cumming a blaze away,
And Miller's saints blow up the globe;
But when you see that blessed day,
THEN order your ascension robe!


The company seemed to like the verses, and I promised them to read
others occasionally, if they had a mind to hear them.  Of course
they would not expect it every morning.  Neither must the reader
suppose that all these things I have reported were said at any one
breakfast-time.  I have not taken the trouble to date them, as
Raspail, pere, used to date every proof he sent to the printer; but
they were scattered over several breakfasts; and I have said a good
many more things since, which I shall very possibly print some time
or other, if I am urged to do it by judicious friends.

I finished off with reading some verses of my friend the Professor,
of whom you may perhaps hear more by and by.  The Professor read
them, he told me, at a farewell meeting, where the youngest of our
great Historians met a few of his many friends at their invitation.


Yes, we knew we must lose him,--though friendship may claim
To blend her green leaves with the laurels of fame;
Though fondly, at parting, we call him our own,
'Tis the whisper of love when the bugle has blown.

As the rider that rests with the spur on his heel,--
As the guardsman that sleeps in his corselet of steel,--
As the archer that stands with his shaft on the string,
He stoops from his toil to the garland we bring.

What pictures yet slumber unborn in his loom
Till their warriors shall breathe and their beauties shall bloom,
While the tapestry lengthens the life-glowing dyes
That caught from our sunsets the stain of their skies!

In the alcoves of death, in the charnels of time,
Where flit the gaunt spectres of passion and crime,
There are triumphs untold, there are martyrs unsung,
There are heroes yet silent to speak with his tongue!

Let us hear the proud story which time has bequeathed
From lips that are warm with the freedom they breathed!
Let him summon its tyrants, and tell us their doom,
Though he sweep the black past like Van Tromp with his broom!

* * * * *

The dream flashes by, for the west-winds awake
On pampas, on prairie, o'er mountain and lake,
To bathe the swift bark, like a sea-girdled shrine,
With incense they stole from the rose and the pine.

So fill a bright cup with the sunlight that gushed
When the dead summer's jewels were trampled and crushed:
THE TRUE KNIGHT OF LEARNING,--the world holds him dear,--
Love bless him, Joy crown him, God speed his career!



CHAPTER II



I really believe some people save their bright thoughts, as being
too precious for conversation.  What do you think an admiring
friend said the other day to one that was talking good things,
--good enough to print?   "Why," said he, "you are wasting
mechantable literature, a cash article, at the rate, as nearly as I
can tell, of fifty dollars an hour."  The talker took him to the
window and asked him to look out and tell what he saw.

"Nothing but a very dusty street," he said, "and a man driving a
sprinkling-machine through it."

"Why don't you tell the man he is wasting that water?  What would
be the state of the highways of life, if we did not drive our
THOUGHT-SPRINKLERS through them with the valves open, sometimes?

"Besides, there is another thing about this talking, which you
forget.  It shapes our thoughts for us;--the waves of conversation
roll them as the surf rolls the pebbles on the shore.  Let me
modify the image a little.  I rough out my thoughts in talk as an
artist models in clay.  Spoken language is so plastic,--you can pat
and coax, and spread and shave, and rub out, and fill up, and stick
on so easily when you work that soft material, that there is
nothing like it for modelling.  Out of it come the shapes which you
turn into marble or bronze in your immortal books, if you happen to
write such.  Or, to use another illustration, writing or printing
is like shooting with a rifle; you may hit your reader's mind, or
miss it;--but talking is like playing at a mark with the pipe of an
engine; if it is within reach, and you have time enough, you can't
help hitting it."

The company agreed that this last illustration was of superior
excellence, or, in the phrase used by them, "Fust-rate."  I
acknowledged the compliment, but gently rebuked the expression.
"Fust-rate," "prime," "a prime article," "a superior piece of
goods," "a handsome garment," "a gent in a flowered vest,"--all
such expressions are final.  They blast the lineage of him or her
who utters them, for generations up and down.  There is one other
phrase which will soon come to be decisive of a man's social
STATUS, if it is not already:   "That tells the whole story."  It
is an expression which vulgar and conceited people particularly
affect, and which well-meaning ones, who know better, catch from
them.  It is intended to stop all debate, like the previous
question in the General Court.  Only it doesn't; simply because
"that" does not usually tell the whole, nor one half of the whole
story.

--It is an odd idea, that almost all our people have had a
professional education.  To become a doctor a man must study some
three years and hear a thousand lectures, more or less.  Just how
much study it takes to make a lawyer I cannot say, but probably not
more than this.  Now most decent people hear one hundred lectures
or sermons (discourses) on theology every year,--and this, twenty,
thirty, fifty years together.  They read a great many religious
books besides.  The clergy, however, rarely hear any sermons except
what they preach themselves.  A dull preacher might be conceived,
therefore, to lapse into a state of quasi heathenism, simply for
want of religious instruction.  And on the other hand, an attentive
and intelligent hearer, listening to a succession of wise teachers,
might become actually better educated in theology than any one of
them.  We are all theological students, and more of us qualified as
doctors of divinity than have received degrees at any of the
universities.

It is not strange, therefore, that very good people should often
find it difficult, if not impossible, to keep their attention fixed
upon a sermon treating feebly a subject which they have thought
vigorously about for years, and heard able men discuss scores of
times.  I have often noticed, however, that a hopelessly dull
discourse acts INDUCTIVELY, as electricians would say, in
developing strong mental currents.  I am ashamed to think with what
accompaniments and variations and fioriture I have sometimes
followed the droning of a heavy speaker,--not willingly,--for my
habit is reverential,--but as a necessary result of a slight
continuous impression on the senses and the mind, which kept both
in action without furnishing the food they required to work upon.
If you ever saw a crow with a king-bird after him, you will get an
image of a dull speaker and a lively listener.  The bird in sable
plumage flaps heavily along his straight-forward course, while the
other sails round him, over him, under him, leaves him, comes back
again, tweaks out a black feather, shoots away once more, never
losing sight of him, and finally reaches the crow's perch at the
same time the crow does, having cut a perfect labyrinth of loops
and knots and spirals while the slow fowl was painfully working
from one end of his straight line to the other.

[I think these remarks were received rather coolly.  A temporary
boarder from the country, consisting of a somewhat more than
middle-aged female, with a parchment forehead and a dry little
"frisette" shingling it, a sallow neck with a necklace of gold
beads, a black dress too rusty for recent grief and contours in
basso-rilievo, left the table prematurely, and was reported to have
been very virulent about what I said.  So I went to my good old
minister, and repeated the remarks, as nearly as I could remember
them, to him.  He laughed good-naturedly, and said there was
considerable truth in them.  He thought he could tell when people's
minds were wandering, by their looks.  In the earlier years of his
ministry he had sometimes noticed this, when he was preaching;
--very little of late years.  Sometimes, when his colleague was
preaching, he observed this kind of inattention; but after all, it
was not so very unnatural.  I will say, by the way, that it is a
rule I have long followed, to tell my worst thoughts to my
minister, and my best thoughts to the young people I talk with.]

--I want to make a literary confession now, which I believe nobody
has made before me.  You know very well that I write verses
sometimes, because I have read some of them at this table.  (The
company assented,--two or three of them in a resigned sort of way,
as I thought, as if they supposed I had an epic in my pocket, and
was going to read half a dozen books or so for their benefit.)--I
continued.  Of course I write some lines or passages which are
better than others; some which, compared with the others, might be
called relatively excellent.  It is in the nature of things that I
should consider these relatively excellent lines or passages as
absolutely good.  So much must be pardoned to humanity.  Now I
never wrote a "good" line in my life, but the moment after it was
written it seemed a hundred years old.  Very commonly I had a
sudden conviction that I had seen it somewhere.  Possibly I may
have sometimes unconsciously stolen it, but I do not remember that
I ever once detected any historical truth in these sudden
convictions of the antiquity of my new thought or phrase.  I have
learned utterly to distrust them, and never allow them to bully me
out of a thought or line.

This is the philosophy of it.  (Here the number of the company was
diminished by a small secession.)  Any new formula which suddenly
emerges in our consciousness has its roots in long trains of
thought; it is virtually old when it first makes its appearance
among the recognized growths of our intellect.  Any crystalline
group of musical words has had a long and still period to form in.
Here is one theory.

But there is a larger law which perhaps comprehends these facts.
It is this.  The rapidity with which ideas grow old in our memories
is in a direct ratio to the squares of their importance.  Their
apparent age runs up miraculously, like the value of diamonds, as
they increase in magnitude.  A great calamity, for instance, is as
old as the trilobites an hour after it has happened.  It stains
backward through all the leaves we have turned over in the book of
life, before its blot of tears or of blood is dry on the page we
are turning.  For this we seem to have lived; it was foreshadowed
in dreams that we leaped out of in the cold sweat of terror; in the
"dissolving views" of dark day-visions; all omens pointed to it;
all paths led to it.  After the tossing half-forgetfulness of the
first sleep that follows such an event, it comes upon us afresh, as
a surprise, at waking; in a few moments it is old again,--old as
eternity.

[I wish I had not said all this then and there.  I might have known
better.  The pale schoolmistress, in her mourning dress, was
looking at me, as I noticed, with a wild sort of expression.  All
at once the blood dropped out of her cheeks as the mercury drops
from a broken barometer-tube, and she melted away from her seat
like an image of snow; a slung-shot could not have brought her down
better.  God forgive me!

After this little episode, I continued, to some few that remained
balancing teaspoons on the edges of cups, twirling knives, or
tilting upon the hind legs of their chairs until their heads
reached the wall, where they left gratuitous advertisements of
various popular cosmetics.]

When a person is suddenly thrust into any strange, new position of
trial, he finds the place fits him as if he had been measured for
it.  He has committed a great crime, for instance, and is sent to
the State Prison.  The traditions, prescriptions, limitations,
privileges, all the sharp conditions of his new life, stamp
themselves upon his consciousness as the signet on soft wax;--a
single pressure is enough.  Let me strengthen the image a little.
Did you ever happen to see that most soft-spoken and velvet-handed
steam-engine at the Mint?  The smooth piston slides backward and
forward as a lady might slip her delicate finger in and out of a
ring.  The engine lays one of ITS fingers calmly, but firmly, upon
a bit of metal; it is a coin now, and will remember that touch, and
tell a new race about it, when the date upon it is crusted over
with twenty centuries.  So it is that a great silent-moving misery
puts a new stamp on us in an hour or a moment,--as sharp an
impression as if it had taken half a lifetime to engrave it.

It is awful to be in the hands of the wholesale professional
dealers in misfortune; undertakers and jailers magnetize you in a
moment, and you pass out of the individual life you were living
into the rhythmical movements of their horrible machinery.  Do the
worst thing you can, or suffer the worst that can be thought of,
you find yourself in a category of humanity that stretches back as
far as Cain, and with an expert at your elbow who has studied your
case all out beforehand, and is waiting for you with his implements
of hemp or mahogany.  I believe, if a man were to be burned in any
of our cities tomorrow for heresy, there would be found a master of
ceremonies that knew just how many fagots were necessary, and the
best way of arranging the whole matter.

--So we have not won the Goodwood cup; au contraire, we were a "bad
fifth," if not worse than that; and trying it again, and the third
time, has not yet bettered the matter.  Now I am as patriotic as
any of my fellow-citizens,--too patriotic in fact, for I have got
into hot water by loving too much of my country; in short, if any
man, whose fighting weight is not more than eight stone four
pounds, disputes it, I am ready to discuss the point with him.  I
should have gloried to see the stars and stripes in front at the
finish.  I love my country, and I love horses.  Stubbs's old
mezzotint of Eclipse hangs over my desk, and Herring's portrait of
Plenipotentiary,--whom I saw run at Epsom,--over my fireplace.  Did
I not elope from school to see Revenge, and Prospect, and Little
John, and Peacemaker run over the race-course where now yon
suburban village flourishes, in the year eighteen hundred and
ever-so-few?  Though I never owned a horse, have I not been the
proprietor of six equine females, of which one was the prettiest
little "Morgin" that ever stepped?  Listen, then, to an opinion I
have often expressed long before this venture of ours in England.
Horse-RACING is not a republican institution; horse-TROTTING is.
Only very rich persons can keep race-horses, and everybody knows
they are kept mainly as gambling implements.  All that matter about
blood and speed we won't discuss; we understand all that; useful,
very,--OF course,--great obligations to the Godolphin "Arabian,"
and the rest.  I say racing horses are essentially gambling
implements, as much as roulette tables.  Now I am not preaching at
this moment; I may read you one of my sermons some other morning;
but I maintain that gambling, on the great scale, is not
republican.  It belongs to two phases of society,--a cankered
over-civilization, such as exists in rich aristocracies, and the
reckless life of borderers and adventurers, or the semi-barbarism
of a civilization resolved into its primitive elements.  Real
Republicanism is stern and severe; its essence is not in forms of
government, but in the omnipotence of public opinion which grows
out of it.  This public opinion cannot prevent gambling with dice
or stocks, but it can and does compel it to keep comparatively
quiet.  But horse-racing is the most public way of gambling, and
with all its immense attractions to the sense and the feelings,--to
which I plead very susceptible,--the disguise is too thin that
covers it, and everybody knows what it means.  Its supporters are
the Southern gentry,--fine fellows, no doubt, but not republicans
exactly, as we understand the term,--a few Northern millionnaires
more or less thoroughly millioned, who do not represent the real
people, and the mob of sporting men, the best of whom are commonly
idlers, and the worst very bad neighbors to have near one in a
crowd, or to meet in a dark alley.  In England, on the other hand,
with its aristocratic institutions, racing is a natural growth
enough; the passion for it spreads downwards through all classes,
from the Queen to the costermonger.  London is like a shelled
corn-cob on the Derby day, and there is not a clerk who could raise
the money to hire a saddle with an old hack under it that can sit down
on his office-stool the next day without wincing.

Now just compare the racer with the trotter for a moment.  The
racer is incidentally useful, but essentially something to bet
upon, as much as the thimble-rigger's "little joker."  The trotter
is essentially and daily useful, and only incidentally a tool for
sporting men.

What better reason do you want for the fact that the racer is most
cultivated and reaches his greatest perfection in England, and that
the trotting horses of America beat the world?  And why should we
have expected that the pick--if it was the pick--of our few and
far-between racing stables should beat the pick of England and
France?  Throw over the fallacious time-test, and there was nothing
to show for it but a natural kind of patriotic feeling, which we
all have, with a thoroughly provincial conceit, which some of us
must plead guilty to.

We may beat yet.  As an American, I hope we shall.  As a moralist
and occasional sermonizer, I am not so anxious about it.  Wherever
the trotting horse goes, he carries in his train brisk omnibuses,
lively bakers' carts, and therefore hot rolls, the jolly butcher's
wagon, the cheerful gig, the wholesome afternoon drive with wife
and child,--all the forms of moral excellence, except truth, which
does not agree with any kind of horse-flesh.  The racer brings with
him gambling, cursing, swearing, drinking, the eating of oysters,
and a distaste for mob-caps and the middle-aged virtues.

And by the way, let me beg you not to call a TROTTING MATCH a RACE,
and not to speak of a "thoroughbred" as a "BLOODED" horse, unless
he has been recently phlebotomized.  I consent to your saying
"blood horse," if you like.  Also, if, next year, we send out
Posterior and Posterioress, the winners of the great national
four-mile race in 7 18.5, and they happen to get beaten, pay your
bets, and behave like men and gentlemen about it, if you know how.

[I felt a great deal better after blowing off the ill-temper
condensed in the above paragraph.  To brag little,--to show well,
--to crow gently, if in luck,--to pay up, to own up, and to shut up,
if beaten, are the virtues of a sporting man, and I can't say that
I think we have shown them in any great perfection of late.]

--Apropos of horses.  Do you know how important good jockeying is
to authors?  Judicious management; letting the public see your
animal just enough, and not too much; holding him up hard when the
market is too full of him; letting him out at just the right buying
intervals; always gently feeling his mouth; never slacking and
never jerking the rein;--this is what I mean by jockeying.

--When an author has a number of books out a cunning hand will keep
them all spinning, as Signor Blitz does his dinner-plates; fetching
each one up, as it begins to "wabble," by an advertisement, a puff,
or a quotation.

--Whenever the extracts from a living writer begin to multiply fast
in the papers, without obvious reason, there is a new book or a new
edition coming.  The extracts are GROUND-BAIT.

--Literary life is fun of curious phenomena.  I don't know that
there is anything more noticeable than what we may call
CONVENTIONAL REPUTATIONS.  There is a tacit understanding in every
community of men of letters that they will not disturb the popular
fallacy respecting this or that electro-gilded celebrity.  There
are various reasons for this forbearance:  one is old; one is rich;
one is good-natured; one is such a favorite with the pit that it
would not be safe to hiss him from the manager's box.  The
venerable augurs of the literary or scientific temple may smile
faintly when one of the tribe is mentioned; but the farce is in
general kept up as well as the Chinese comic scene of entreating
and imploring a man to stay with you with the implied compact
between you that he shall by no means think of doing it.  A poor
wretch he must be who would wantonly sit down on one of these
bandbox reputations.  A Prince-Rupert's-drop, which is a tear of
unannealed glass, lasts indefinitely, if you keep it from meddling
hands; but break its tail off, and it explodes and resolves itself
into powder.  These celebrities I speak of are the Prince-Rupert's
drops of the learned and polite world.  See how the papers treat
them!  What an array of pleasant kaleidoscopic phrases, which can
be arranged in ever so many charming patterns, is at their service!
How kind the "Critical Notices"--where small authorship comes to
pick up chips of praise, fragrant, sugary, and sappy--always are to
them!  Well, life would be nothing without paper-credit and other
fictions; so let them pass current.  Don't steal their chips; don't
puncture their swimming-bladders; don't come down on their
pasteboard boxes; don't break the ends of their brittle and
unstable reputations, you fellows who all feel sure that your names
will be household words a thousand years from now.

"A thousand years is a good while," said the old gentleman who sits
opposite, thoughtfully.

--Where have I been for the last three or four days?  Down at the
Island, deer-shooting.--How many did I bag?  I brought home one
buck shot.--The Island is where?  No matter.  It is the most
splendid domain that any man looks upon in these latitudes.  Blue
sea around it, and running up into its heart, so that the little
boat slumbers like a baby in lap, while the tall ships are
stripping naked to fight the hurricane outside, and storm-stay-
sails banging and flying in ribbons.  Trees, in stretches of miles;
beeches, oaks, most numerous;--many of them hung with moss, looking
like bearded Druids; some coiled in the clasp of huge, dark-stemmed
grape-vines.  Open patches where the sun gets in and goes to sleep,
and the winds come so finely sifted that they are as soft as
swan's down.  Rocks scattered about,--Stonehenge-like monoliths.
Fresh-water lakes; one of them, Mary's lake, crystal-clear, full of
flashing pickerel lying under the lily-pads like tigers in the
jungle.  Six pounds of ditto killed one morning for breakfast.
EGO fecit.

The divinity-student looked as if he would like to question my
Latin.  No, sir, I said,--you need not trouble yourself.  There is
a higher law in grammar, not to be put down by Andrews and
Stoddard.  Then I went on.

Such hospitality as that island has seen there has not been the
like of in these our New England sovereignties.  There is nothing
in the shape of kindness and courtesy that can make life beautiful,
which has not found its home in that ocean-principality.  It has
welcomed all who were worthy of welcome, from the pale clergyman
who came to breathe the sea-air with its medicinal salt and iodine,
to the great statesman who turned his back on the affairs of
empire, and smoothed his Olympian forehead, and flashed his white
teeth in merriment over the long table, where his wit was the
keenest and his story the best.

[I don't believe any man ever talked like that in this world.  I
don't believe _I_ talked just so; but the fact is, in reporting
one's conversation, one cannot help BLAIR-ing it up more or less,
ironing out crumpled paragraphs, starching limp ones, and crimping
and plaiting a little sometimes; it is as natural as prinking at
the looking-glass.]

--How can a man help writing poetry in such a place?  Everybody
does write poetry that goes there.  In the state archives, kept in
the library of the Lord of the Isle, are whole volumes of
unpublished verse,--some by well-known hands, and others quite as
good, by the last people you would think of as versifiers,--men who
could pension off all the genuine poets in the country, and buy ten
acres of Boston common, if it was for sale, with what they had
left.  Of course I had to write my little copy of verses with the
rest; here it is, if you will hear me read it.  When the sun is in
the west, vessels sailing in an easterly direction look bright or
dark to one who observes them from the north or south, according to
the tack they are sailing upon.  Watching them from one of the
windows of the great mansion, I saw these perpetual changes, and
moralized thus:-


SUN AND SHADOW.


As I look from the isle, o'er its billows of green,
To the billows of foam-crested blue,
Yon bark, that afar in the distance is seen,
Half dreaming, my eyes will pursue:
Now dark in the shadow, she scatters the spray
As the chaff in the stroke of the flail;
Now white as the sea-gull, she flies on her way,
The sun gleaming bright on her sail.

Yet her pilot is thinking of dangers to shun,--
Of breakers that whiten and roar;
How little he cares, if in shadow or sun
They see him that gaze from the shore!
He looks to the beacon that looms from the reef,
To the rock that is under his lee,
As he drifts on the blast, like a wind-wafted leaf,
O'er the gulfs of the desolate sea.

Thus drifting afar to the dim-vaulted caves
Where life and its ventures are laid,
The dreamers who gaze while we battle the waves
May see us in sunshine or shade;
Yet true to our course, though our shadow grow dark,
We'll trim our broad sail as before,
And stand by the rudder that governs the bark,
Nor ask how we look from the shore!


--Insanity is often the logic of an accurate mind overtasked.  Good
mental machinery ought to break its own wheels and levers, if
anything is thrust among them suddenly which tends to stop them or
reverse their motion.  A weak mind does not accumulate force enough
to hurt itself; stupidity often saves a man from going mad.  We
frequently see persons in insane hospitals, sent there in
consequence of what are called RELIGIOUS mental disturbances.  I
confess that I think better of them than of many who hold the same
notions, and keep their wits and appear to enjoy life very well,
outside of the asylums.  Any decent person ought to go mad, if he
really holds such or such opinions.  It is very much to his
discredit in every point of view, if he does not.  What is the use
of my saying what some of these opinions are?  Perhaps more than
one of you hold such as I should think ought to send you straight
over to Somerville, if you have any logic in your heads or any
human feeling in your hearts.  Anything that is brutal, cruel,
heathenish, that makes life hopeless for the most of mankind and
perhaps for entire races,--anything that assumes the necessity of
the extermination of instincts which were given to be regulated,
--no matter by what name you call it,--no matter whether a fakir, or
a monk, or a deacon believes it,--if received, ought to produce
insanity in every well-regulated mind.  That condition becomes a
normal one, under the circumstances.  I am very much ashamed of
some people for retaining their reason, when they know perfectly
well that if they were not the most stupid or the most selfish of
human beings, they would become non-compotes at once.

[Nobody understood this but the theological student and the
schoolmistress.  They looked intelligently at each other; but
whether they were thinking about my paradox or not, I am not
clear.--It would be natural enough.  Stranger things have happened.
Love and Death enter boarding-houses without asking the price of
board, or whether there is room for them.  Alas, these young people
are poor and pallid!  Love SHOULD be both rich and rosy, but MUST
be either rich or rosy.  Talk about military duty!  What is that to
the warfare of a married maid-of-all-work, with the title of
mistress, and an American female constitution, which collapses just
in the middle third of life, and comes out vulcanized India-rubber,
if it happen to live through the period when health and strength
are most wanted?]

--Have I ever acted in private theatricals?  Often.  I have played
the part of the "Poor Gentleman," before a great many audiences,
--more, I trust, than I shall ever face again.  I did not wear a
stage-costume, nor a wig, nor moustaches of burnt cork; but I was
placarded and announced as a public performer, and at the proper
hour I came forward with the ballet-dancer's smile upon my
countenance, and made my bow and acted my part.  I have seen my
name stuck up in letters so big that I was ashamed to show myself
in the place by daylight.  I have gone to a town with a sober
literary essay in my pocket, and seen myself everywhere announced
as the most desperate of buffos,--one who was obliged to restrain
himself in the full exercise of his powers, from prudential
considerations.  I have been through as many hardships as Ulysses,
in the pursuit of my histrionic vocation.  I have travelled in cars
until the conductors all knew me like a brother.  I have run off
the rails, and stuck all night in snow-drifts, and sat behind
females that would have the window open when one could not wink
without his eyelids freezing together.  Perhaps I shall give you
some of my experiences one of these days;--I will not now, for I
have something else for you.

Private theatricals, as I have figured in them in country
lyceum-halls, are one thing,--and private theatricals, as they may be
seen in certain gilded and frescoed saloons of our metropolis, are
another.  Yes, it is pleasant to see real gentlemen and ladies, who do
not think it necessary to mouth, and rant, and stride, like most of
our stage heroes and heroines, in the characters which show off their
graces and talents; most of all to see a fresh, unrouged, unspoiled,
high bred young maiden, with a lithe figure, and a pleasant voice,
acting in those love-dramas which make us young again to look upon,
when real youth and beauty will play them for us.

--Of course I wrote the prologue I was asked to write.  I did not
see the play, though.  I knew there was a young lady in it, and
that somebody was in love with her, and she was in love with him,
and somebody (an old tutor, I believe) wanted to interfere, and,
very naturally, the young lady was too sharp for him.  The play of
course ends charmingly; there is a general reconciliation, and all
concerned form a line and take each others' hands, as people always
do after they have made up their quarrels,--and then the curtain
falls,--if it does not stick, as it commonly does at private
theatrical exhibitions, in which case a boy is detailed to pull it
down, which he does, blushing violently.

Now, then, for my prologue.  I am not going to change my caesuras
and cadences for anybody; so if you do not like the heroic, or
iambic trimeter brachy-catalectic, you had better not wait to hear
it


THIS IS IT.

A Prologue?  Well, of course the ladies know;--
I have my doubts.  No matter,--here we go!
What is a Prologue?  Let our Tutor teach:
Pro means beforehand; logos stands for speech.
'Tis like the harper's prelude on the strings,
The prima donna's courtesy ere she sings;--
Prologues in metre are to other pros
As worsted stockings are to engine-hose.

"The world's a stage," as Shakspeare said, one day;
The stage a world--was what he meant to say.
The outside world's a blunder, that is clear;
The real world that Nature meant is here.
Here every foundling finds its lost mamma;
Each rogue, repentant, melts his stern papa;
Misers relent, the spendthrift's debts are paid,
The cheats are taken in the traps they laid;
One after one the troubles all are past
Till the fifth act comes right side up at last,
When the young couple, old folks, rogues, and all,
Join hands, SO happy at the curtain's fall.
--Here suffering virtue ever finds relief,
And black-browed ruffians always come to grief,
--When the lorn damsel, with a frantic screech,
And cheeks as hueless as a brandy-peach,
Cries, "Help, kyind Heaven!" and drops upon her knees
On the green--baize,--beneath the (canvas) trees,--
See to her side avenging Valor fly:-
"Ha! Villain!  Draw!  Now, Terraitorr, yield or die!"
--When the poor hero flounders in despair,
Some dear lost uncle turns up millionnaire,--
Clasps the young scapegrace with paternal joy,
Sobs on his neck, "MY BOY!  MY BOY!!  MY BOY!!!"

Ours, then, sweet friends, the real world to-night.
Of love that conquers in disaster's spite.
Ladies, attend!  While woful cares and doubt
Wrong the soft passion in the world without,
Though fortune scowl, though prudence interfere,
One thing is certain:  Love will triumph here!

Lords of creation, whom your ladies rule,--
The world's great masters, when you're out of school,--
Learn the brief moral of our evening's play:
Man has his will,--but woman has her way!
While man's dull spirit toils in smoke and fire,
Woman's swift instinct threads the electric wire,--
The magic bracelet stretched beneath the waves
Beats the black giant with his score of slaves.
All earthly powers confess your sovereign art
But that one rebel,--woman's wilful heart.
All foes you master; but a woman's wit
Lets daylight through you ere you know you're hit.
So, just to picture what her art can do,
Hear an old story made as good as new.

Rudolph, professor of the headsman's trade,
Alike was famous for his arm and blade.
One day a prisoner Justice had to kill
Knelt at the block to test the artist's skill.
Bare-armed, swart-visaged, gaunt, and shaggy-browed,
Rudolph the headsman rose above the crowd.
His falchion lightened with a sudden gleam,
As the pike's armor flashes in the stream.
He sheathed his blade; he turned as if to go;
The victim knelt, still waiting for the blow.
"Why strikest not?  Perform thy murderous act,"
The prisoner said.  (His voice was slightly cracked.)
"Friend I HAVE struck," the artist straight replied;
"Wait but one moment, and yourself decide."

He held his snuff-box,--"Now then, if you please!"
The prisoner sniffed, and, with a crashing sneeze,
Off his head tumbled,--bowled along the floor,--
Bounced down the steps;--the prisoner said no more!

Woman! thy falchion is a glittering eye;
If death lurks in it, oh, how sweet to die!
Thou takest hearts as Rudolph took the head;
We die with love, and never dream we're dead!


The prologue went off very well, as I hear.  No alterations were
suggested by the lady to whom it was sent, so far as I know.
Sometimes people criticize the poems one sends them, and suggest
all sorts of improvements.  Who was that silly body that wanted
Burns to alter "Scots wha hae," so as to lengthen the last line,
thus


"EDWARD!" Chains and slavery!


Here is a little poem I sent a short time since to a committee for
a certain celebration.  I understood that it was to be a festive
and convivial occasion, and ordered myself accordingly.  It seems
the president of the day was what is called a "teetotaller."  I
received a note from him in the following words, containing the
copy subjoined, with the emendations annexed to it.

"Dear Sir,--your poem gives good satisfaction to the committee.
The sentiments expressed with reference to liquor are not, however,
those generally entertained by this community.  I have therefore
consulted the clergyman of this place, who has made come slight
changes, which he thinks will remove all objections, and keep the
valuable portions of the poem.  Please to inform me of your charge
for said poem.  Our means are limited, etc., etc., etc.

Yours with respect,"


HERE IT IS--WITH THE SLIGHT ALTERATIONS!

Come! fill a fresh bumper,--for why should we go
While the [nectar] [logwood] still reddens our cups as they flow?
Pour out the [rich juices] [decoction] still bright with the sun,
Till o'er the brimmed crystal the [rubies] [dye-stuff] shall run.

The [purple glebed clusters] [half-ripened apples] their life-dews
have bled;
How sweet is the [breath] [taste] of the [fragrance they shed]
[sugar of lead]!
For summer's [last roses] [rank poisons] lie hid in the [wines]
[WINES!!!]
That were garnered by [maidens who laughed through the vines.]
[stable-boys smoking long-nines.]

Then a [smile] [scowl], and a [glass] [howl], and a [toast]
[scoff], and a [cheer] [sneer],
For all [the good wine, and we've some of it here] [strychnine and
whiskey, and ratsbane and beer]
In cellar, in pantry, in attic, in hall,
[Long live the gay servant that laughs for us all!] [Down, down,
with the tyrant that masters us all!]


The company said I had been shabbily treated, and advised me to
charge the committee double,--which I did.  But as I never got my
pay, I don't know that it made much difference.  I am a very
particular person about having all I write printed as I write it.
I require to see a proof, a revise, a re-revise, and a double
re-revise, or fourth-proof rectified impression of all my productions,
especially verse.  A misprint kills a sensitive author.  An
intentional change of his text murders him.  No wonder so many poets
die young!

I have nothing more to report at this time, except two pieces of
advice I gave to the young women at table.  One relates to a
vulgarism of language, which I grieve to say is sometimes heard
even from female lips.  The other is of more serious purport, and
applies to such as contemplate a change of condition,--matrimony,
in fact.

--The woman who "calculates" is lost.

--Put not your trust in money, but put your money in trust.



CHAPTER III



[The "Atlantic" obeys the moon, and its LUNIVERSARY has come round
again.  I have gathered up some hasty notes of my remarks made
since the last high tides, which I respectfully submit.  Please to
remember this is TALK; just as easy and just as formal as I choose
to make it.]

--I never saw an author in my life--saving, perhaps, one--that did
not purr as audibly as a full-grown domestic cat, (Felis Catus,
LINN.,) on having his fur smoothed in the right way by a skilful
hand.

But let me give you a caution.  Be very careful how you tell an
author he is DROLL.  Ten to one he will hate you; and if he does,
be sure he can do you a mischief, and very probably will.  Say you
CRIED over his romance or his verses, and he will love you and send
you a copy.  You can laugh over that as much as you like--in
private.

--Wonder why authors and actors are ashamed of being funny?--Why,
there are obvious reasons, and deep philosophical ones.  The clown
knows very well that the women are not in love with him, but with
Hamlet, the fellow in the black cloak and plumed hat.  Passion
never laughs.  The wit knows that his place is at the tail of a
procession.

If you want the deep underlying reason, I must take more time to
tell it.  There is a perfect consciousness in every form of wit
--using that term in its general sense--that its essence consists in
a partial and incomplete view of whatever it touches.  It throws a
single ray, separated from the rest,--red, yellow, blue, or any
intermediate shade,--upon an object; never white light; that is the
province of wisdom.  We get beautiful effects from wit,--all the
prismatic colors,--but never the object as it is in fair daylight.
A pun, which is a kind if wit, is a different and much shallower
trick in mental optics throwing the SHADOWS of two objects so that
one overlies the other.  Poetry uses the rainbow tints for special
effects, but always keeps its essential object in the purest white
light of truth.--Will you allow me to pursue this subject a little
further?

[They didn't allow me at that time, for somebody happened to scrape
the floor with his chair just then; which accidental sound, as all
must have noticed, has the instantaneous effect that the cutting of
the yellow hair by Iris had upon infelix Dido.  It broke the charm,
and that breakfast was over.]

--Don't flatter yourselves that friendship authorizes you to say
disagreeable things to your intimates.  On the contrary, the nearer
you come into relation with a person, the more necessary do tact
and courtesy become.  Except in cases of necessity, which are rare,
leave your friend to learn unpleasant truths from his enemies; they
are ready enough to tell them.  Good-breeding NEVER forgets that
amour-propre is universal.  When you read the story of the
Archbishop and Gil Blas, you may laugh, if you will, at the poor
old man's delusion; but don't forget that the youth was the greater
fool of the two, and that his master served such a booby rightly in
turning him out of doors.

--You need not get up a rebellion against what I say, if you find
everything in my sayings is not exactly new.  You can't possibly
mistake a man who means to be honest for a literary pickpocket.  I
once read an introductory lecture that looked to me too learned for
its latitude.  On examination, I found all its erudition was taken
ready-made from D'Israeli.  If I had been ill-natured, I should
have shown up the little great man, who had once belabored me in
his feeble way.  But one can generally tell these wholesale thieves
easily enough, and they are not worth the trouble of putting them
in the pillory.  I doubt the entire novelty of my remarks just made
on telling unpleasant truths, yet I am not conscious of any
larceny.

Neither make too much of flaws and occasional overstatements.  Some
persons seem to think that absolute truth, in the form of rigidly
stated propositions, is all that conversation admits.  This is
precisely as if a musician should insist on having nothing but
perfect chords and simple melodies,--no diminished fifths, no flat
sevenths, no flourishes, on any account.  Now it is fair to say,
that, just as music must have all these, so conversation must have
its partial truths, its embellished truths, its exaggerated truths.
It is in its higher forms an artistic product, and admits the ideal
element as much as pictures or statues.  One man who is a little
too literal can spoil the talk of a whole tableful of men of
esprit.--"Yes," you say, "but who wants to hear fanciful people's
nonsense?  Put the facts to it, and then see where it is!"
--Certainly, if a man is too fond of paradox,--if he is flighty and
empty,--if, instead of striking those fifths and sevenths, those
harmonious discords, often so much better than the twinned octaves,
in the music of thought,--if, instead of striking these, he jangles
the chords, stick a fact into him like a stiletto.  But remember
that talking is one of the fine arts,--the noblest, the most
important, and the most difficult,--and that its fluent harmonies
may be spoiled by the intrusion of a single harsh note.  Therefore
conversation which is suggestive rather than argumentative, which
lets out the most of each talker's results of thought, is commonly
the pleasantest and the most profitable.  It is not easy, at the
best, for two persons talking together to make the most of each
other's thoughts, there are so many of them.

[The company looked as if they wanted an explanation.]

When John and Thomas, for instance, are talking together, it is
natural enough that among the six there should be more or less
confusion and misapprehension.

[Our landlady turned pale;--no doubt she thought there was a screw
loose in my intellects,--and that involved the probable loss of a
boarder.  A severe-looking person, who wears a Spanish cloak and a
sad cheek, fluted by the passions of the melodrama, whom I
understand to be the professional ruffian of the neighboring
theatre, alluded, with a certain lifting of the brow, drawing down
of the corners of the mouth, and somewhat rasping voce di petto, to
Falstaff's nine men in buckram.  Everybody looked up.  I believe
the old gentleman opposite was afraid I should seize the
carving-knife; at any rate, he slid it to one side, as it were
carelessly.]

I think, I said, I can make it plain to Benjamin Franklin here,
that there are at least six personalities distinctly to be
recognized as taking part in that dialogue between John and Thomas.

Three Johns.

1.  The real John; known only to his Maker.
2.  John's ideal John; never the real one, and often very unlike
him.
3.  Thomas's ideal John; never the real John, nor John's John, but
often very unlike either.

Three Thomas.

1.  The real Thomas.
2.  Thomas's ideal Thomas.
3.  John's ideal Thomas.


Only one of the three Johns is taxed; only one can be weighed on a
platform-balance; but the other two are just as important in the
conversation.  Let us suppose the real John to be old, dull, and
ill-looking.  But as the Higher Powers have not conferred on men
the gift of seeing themselves in the true light, John very possibly
conceives himself to be youthful, witty, and fascinating, and talks
from the point of view of this ideal.  Thomas, again, believes him
to be an artful rogue, we will say; therefore he is, so far as
Thomas's attitude in the conversation is concerned, an artful
rogue, though really simple and stupid.  The same conditions apply
to the three Thomases.  It follows, that, until a man can be found
who knows himself as his Maker knows him, or who sees himself as
others see him, there must be at least six persons engaged in every
dialogue between two.  Of these, the least important,
philosophically speaking, is the one that we have called the real
person.  No wonder two disputants often get angry, when there are
six of them talking and listening all at the same time.

[A very unphilosophical application of the above remarks was made
by a young fellow, answering to the name of John, who sits near me
at table.  A certain basket of peaches, a rare vegetable, little
known to boarding-houses, was on its way to me via this unlettered
Johannes.  He appropriated the three that remained in the basket,
remarking that there was just one apiece for him.  I convinced him
that his practical inference was hasty and illogical, but in the
mean time he had eaten the peaches.]

--The opinions of relatives as to a man's powers are very commonly
of little value; not merely because they sometimes overrate their
own flesh and blood, as some may suppose; on the contrary, they are
quite as likely to underrate those whom they have grown into the
habit of considering like themselves.  The advent of genius is like
what florists style the BREAKING of a seedling tulip into what we
may call high-caste colors,--ten thousand dingy flowers, then one
with the divine streak; or, if you prefer it, like the coming up in
old Jacob's garden of that most gentlemanly little fruit, the
seckel pear, which I have sometimes seen in shop-windows.  It is a
surprise,--there is nothing to account for it.  All at once we find
that twice two make FIVE.  Nature is fond of what are called
"gift-enterprises."  This little book of life which she has given into
the hands of its joint possessors is commonly one of the old
story-books bound over again.  Only once in a great while there is a
stately poem in it, or its leaves are illuminated with the glories of
art, or they enfold a draft for untold values signed by the
million-fold millionnaire old mother herself.  But strangers are
commonly the first to find the "gift" that came with the little book.

It may be questioned whether anything can be conscious of its own
flavor.  Whether the musk-deer, or the civet-cat, or even a still
more eloquently silent animal that might be mentioned, is aware of
any personal peculiarity, may well be doubted.  No man knows his
own voice; many men do not know their own profiles.  Every one
remembers Carlyle's famous "Characteristics" article; allow for
exaggerations, and there is a great deal in his doctrine of the
self-unconsciousness of genius.  It comes under the great law just
stated.  This incapacity of knowing its own traits is often found
in the family as well as in the individual.  So never mind what
your cousins, brothers, sisters, uncles, aunts, and the rest, say
about that fine poem you have written, but send it (postage-paid)
to the editors, if there are any, of the "Atlantic,"--which, by the
way, is not so called because it is A NOTION, as some dull wits
wish they had said, but are too late.

--Scientific knowledge, even in the most modest persons, has
mingled with it a something which partakes of insolence.  Absolute,
peremptory facts are bullies, and those who keep company with them
are apt to get a bullying habit of mind;--not of manners, perhaps;
they may be soft and smooth, but the smile they carry has a quiet
assertion in it, such as the Champion of the Heavy Weights,
commonly the best-natured, but not the most diffident of men, wears
upon what he very inelegantly calls his "mug."  Take the man, for
instance, who deals in the mathematical sciences.  There is no
elasticity in a mathematical fact; if you bring up against it, it
never yields a hair's breadth; everything must go to pieces that
comes in collision with it.  What the mathematician knows being
absolute, unconditional, incapable of suffering question, it should
tend, in the nature of things, to breed a despotic way of thinking.
So of those who deal with the palpable and often unmistakable facts
of external nature; only in a less degree.  Every probability--and
most of our common, working beliefs are probabilities--is provided
with BUFFERS at both ends, which break the force of opposite
opinions clashing against it; but scientific certainty has no
spring in it, no courtesy, no possibility of yielding.  All this
must react on the minds which handle these forms of truth.

--Oh, you need net tell me that Messrs. A. and B. are the most
gracious, unassuming people in the world, and yet preeminent in the
ranges of science I am referring to.  I know that as well as you.
But mark this which I am going to say once for all:  If I had not
force enough to project a principle full in the face of the half
dozen most obvious facts which seem to contradict it, I would think
only in single file from this day forward.  A rash man, once
visiting a certain noted institution at South Boston, ventured to
express the sentiment, that man is a rational being.  An old woman
who was an attendant in the Idiot School contradicted the
statement, and appealed to the facts before the speaker to disprove
it.  The rash man stuck to his hasty generalization,
notwithstanding.

[--It is my desire to be useful to those with whom I am associated
in my daily relations.  I not unfrequently practise the divine art
of music in company with our landlady's daughter, who, as I
mentioned before, is the owner of an accordion.  Having myself a
well-marked barytone voice of more than half an octave in compass,
I sometimes add my vocal powers to her execution of


"Thou, thou reign'st in this bosom."


not, however, unless her mother or some other discreet female is
present, to prevent misinterpretation or remark.  I have also taken
a good deal of interest in Benjamin Franklin, before referred to,
sometimes called B. F., or more frequently Frank, in imitation of
that felicitous abbreviation, combining dignity and convenience,
adopted by some of his betters.  My acquaintance with the French
language is very imperfect, I having never studied it anywhere but
in Paris, which is awkward, as B. F. devotes himself to it with the
peculiar advantage of an Alsacian teacher.  The boy, I think, is
doing well, between us, notwithstanding.  The following is an
UNCORRECTED French exercise, written by this young gentleman.  His
mother thinks it very creditable to his abilities; though, being
unacquainted with the French language, her judgment cannot be
considered final.


LE RAT DIES SALONS A LECTURE.


Ce rat ci est un animal fort singulier.  Il a deux pattes de
derriere sur lesquelles il marche, et deux pattes de devant dont il
fait usage pour tenir les journaux.  Cet animal a la peau noire
pour le plupart, et porte un cerele blanchatre autour de son cou.
On le trouve tous les jours aux dits salons, on il demeure, digere,
s'il y a do quoi dans son interieur, respire, tousse, eternue,
dort, et renfle quelquefois, ayant toujours le semblant de lire.
On ne sait pas s'il a une autre gite que cela.  Il a l'air d'une
bete tres stupide, mais il est d'une sagacite et d'une vitesse
extraordinaire quand il s'agit de saisir un journal nouveau.  On ne
sait pas pourquoi il lit, parcequ'il ne parait pas avoir des idees.
Il vocalise rarement, mais en revanche, il fait des bruits nasaux
divers.  Il porte un crayon dans une de ses poches pectorales, avec
lequel il fait des marques sur les bords des journaux et des
livres, semblable aux suivans:  !!!--Bah!  Pooh!  Il ne faut pas
cependant les prendre pour des signes d'intelligence.  Il ne vole
pas, ordinairement; il fait rarement meme des echanges de
parapluie, et jamais de chapeau, parceque son chapeau a toujours un
caractere specifique.  On ne sait pas au juste ce dont il se
nourrit.  Feu Cuvier etait d'avis que c'etait de l'odeur du cuir
des reliures; ce qu'on dit d'etre une nourriture animale fort
saine, et peu chere.  Il vit bien longtems.  Enfin il meure, en
laissant a ses heritiers une carte du Salon a Lecture on il avait
existe pendant sa vie.  On pretend qu'il revient toutes les nuits,
apres la mort, visiter le Salon.  On peut le voir, dit on, a
minuit, dans sa place habituelle, tenant le journal du soir, et
ayant a sa main un crayon de charbon.  Le lendemain on trouve des
caracteres inconnus sur les bords du journal.  Ce qui prouve que le
spiritualisme est vrai, et que Messieurs les Professeurs de
Cambridge sont des imbeciles qui ne savent rien du tout, du tout.


I think this exercise, which I have not corrected, or allowed to be
touched in any way, is not discreditable to B. F.  You observe that
he is acquiring a knowledge of zoology at the same time that he is
learning French.  Fathers of families in moderate circumstances
will find it profitable to their children, and an economical mode
of instruction, to set them to revising and amending this boy's
exercise.  The passage was originally taken from the "Histoire
Naturelle des Betes Ruminans et Rongeurs, Bipedes et Autres,"
lately published in Paris.  This was translated into English and
published in London.  It was republished at Great Pedlington, with
notes and additions by the American editor.  The notes consist of
an interrogation-mark on page 53d, and a reference (p. 127th) to
another book "edited" by the same hand.  The additions consist of
the editor's name on the title-page and back, with a complete and
authentic list of said editor's honorary titles in the first of
these localities.  Our boy translated the translation back into
French.  This may be compared with the original, to be found on
Shelf 13, Division X, of the Public Library of this metropolis.]

--Some of you boarders ask me from time to time why I don't write a
story, or a novel, or something of that kind.  Instead of answering
each one of you separately, I will thank you to step up into the
wholesale department for a few moments, where I deal in answers by
the piece and by the bale.

That every articulately-speaking human being has in him stuff for
ONE novel in three volumes duodecimo has long been with me a
cherished belief.  It has been maintained, on the other hand, that
many persons cannot write more than one novel,--that all after that
are likely to be failures.--Life is so much more tremendous a thing
in its heights and depths than any transcript of it can be, that
all records of human experience are as so many bound herbaria to
the innumerable glowing, glistening, rustling, breathing,
fragrance-laden, poison-sucking, life-giving, death-distilling
leaves and flowers of the forest and the prairies.  All we can do
with books of human experience is to make them alive again with
something borrowed from our own lives.  We can make a book alive
for us just in proportion to its resemblance in essence or in form
to our own experience.  Now an author's first novel is naturally
drawn, to a great extent, from his personal experiences; that is,
is a literal copy of nature under various slight disguises.  But
the moment the author gets out of his personality, he must have the
creative power, as well as the narrative art and the sentiment, in
order to tell a living story; and this is rare.

Besides, there is great danger that a man's first life-story shall
clean him out, so to speak, of his best thoughts.  Most lives,
though their stream is loaded with sand and turbid with alluvial
waste, drop a few golden grains of wisdom as they flow along.
Oftentimes a single CRADLING gets them all, and after that the poor
man's labor is only rewarded by mud and worn pebbles.  All which
proves that I, as an individual of the human family, could write
one novel or story at any rate, if I would.

--Why don't I, then?--Well, there are several reasons against it.
In the first place, I should tell all my secrets, and I maintain
that verse is the proper medium for such revelations.  Rhythm and
rhyme and the harmonies of musical language, the play of fancy, the
fire of imagination, the flashes of passion, so hide the nakedness
of a heart laid open, that hardly any confession, transfigured in
the luminous halo of poetry, is reproached as self-exposure.  A
beauty shows herself under the chandeliers, protected by the
glitter of her diamonds, with such a broad snowdrift of white arms
and shoulders laid bare, that, were she unadorned and in plain
calico, she would be unendurable--in the opinion of the ladies.

Again, I am terribly afraid I should show up all my friends.  I
should like to know if all story-tellers do not do this?  Now I am
afraid all my friends would not bear showing up very well; for they
have an average share of the common weakness of humanity, which I
am pretty certain would come out.  Of all that have told stories
among us there is hardly one I can recall who has not drawn too
faithfully some living portrait that might better have been spared.

Once more, I have sometimes thought it possible I might be too dull
to write such a story as I should wish to write.

And finally, I think it very likely I SHALL write a story one of
these days.  Don't be surprised at any time, if you see me coming
out with "The Schoolmistress," or "The Old Gentleman Opposite."
[OUR schoolmistress and OUR old gentleman that sits opposite had
left the table before I said this.]  I want my glory for writing
the same discounted now, on the spot, if you please.  I will write
when I get ready.  How many people live on the reputation of the
reputation they might have made!

--I saw you smiled when I spoke about the possibility of my being
too dull to write a good story.  I don't pretend to know what you
meant by it, but I take occasion to make a remark which may
hereafter prove of value to some among you.--When one of us who has
been led by native vanity or senseless flattery to think himself or
herself possessed of talent arrives at the full and final
conclusion that he or she is really dull, it is one of the
most tranquillizing and blessed convictions that can enter a
mortal's mind.  All our failures, our shortcomings, our strange
disappointments in the effect of our efforts are lifted from our
bruised shoulders, and fall, like Christian's pack, at the feet of
that Omnipotence which has seen fit to deny us the pleasant gift of
high intelligence,--with which one look may overflow us in some
wider sphere of being.

--How sweetly and honestly one said to me the other day, "I hate
books!"  A gentleman,--singularly free from affectations,--not
learned, of course, but of perfect breeding, which is often so much
better than learning,--by no means dull, in the sense of knowledge
of the world and society, but certainly not clever either in the
arts or sciences,--his company is pleasing to all who know him.  I
did not recognize in him inferiority of literary taste half so
distinctly as I did simplicity of character and fearless
acknowledgment of his inaptitude for scholarship.  In fact, I think
there are a great many gentlemen and others, who read with a mark
to keep their place, that really "hate books," but never had the
wit to find it out, or the manliness to own it.  [Entre nous, I
always read with a mark.]

We get into a way of thinking as if what we call an "intellectual
man" was, as a matter of course, made up of nine-tenths, or
thereabouts, of book-learning, and one-tenth himself.  But even if
he is actually so compounded, he need not read much.  Society is a
strong solution of books.  It draws the virtue out of what is best
worth reading, as hot water draws the strength of tea-leaves.  If
_I_ were a prince, I would hire or buy a private literary tea-pot,
in which I would steep all the leaves of new books that promised
well.  The infusion would do for me without the vegetable fibre.
You understand me; I would have a person whose sole business should
be to read day and night, and talk to me whenever I wanted him to.
I know the man I would have:  a quick-witted, out-spoken, incisive
fellow; knows history, or at any rate has a shelf full of books
about it, which he can use handily, and the same of all useful arts
and sciences; knows all the common plots of plays and novels, and
the stock company of characters that are continually coming on in
new costume; can give you a criticism of an octavo in an epithet
and a wink, and you can depend on it; cares for nobody except for
the virtue there is in what he says; delights in taking off big
wigs and professional gowns, and in the disembalming and
unbandaging of all literary mummies.  Yet he is as tender and
reverential to all that bears the mark of genius,--that is, of a
new influx of truth or beauty,--as a nun over her missal.  In
short, he is one of those men that know everything except how to
make a living.  Him would I keep on the square next my own royal
compartment on life's chessboard.  To him I would push up another
pawn, in the shape of a comely and wise young woman, whom he would
of course take--to wife.  For all contingencies I would liberally
provide.  In a word, I would, in the plebeian, but expressive
phrase, "put him through" all the material part of life; see him
sheltered, warmed, fed, button-mended, and all that, just to be
able to lay on his talk when I liked,--with the privilege of
shutting it off at will.

A Club is the next best thing to this, strung like a harp, with
about a dozen ringing intelligences, each answering to some chord
of the macrocosm.  They do well to dine together once in a while.
A dinner-party made up of such elements is the last triumph of
civilization over barbarism.  Nature and art combine to charm the
senses; the equatorial zone of the system is soothed by
well-studied artifices; the faculties are off duty, and fall into
their natural attitudes; you see wisdom in slippers and science in a
short jacket.

The whole force of conversation depends on how much you can take
for granted.  Vulgar chess-players have to play their game out;
nothing short of the brutality of an actual checkmate satisfies
their dull apprehensions.  But look at two masters of that noble
game!  White stands well enough, so far as you can see; but Red
says, Mate in six moves;--White looks,--nods;--the game is over.
Just so in talking with first-rate men; especially when they are
good-natured and expansive, as they are apt to be at table.  That
blessed clairvoyance which sees into things without opening them,
--that glorious license, which, having shut the door and driven the
reporter from its key-hole, calls upon Truth, majestic virgin! to
get off from her pedestal and drop her academic poses, and take a
festive garland and the vacant place on the medius lectus,--that
carnival-shower of questions and replies and comments, large axioms
bowled over the mahogany like bomb-shells from professional
mortars, and explosive wit dropping its trains of many-colored
fire, and the mischief-making rain of bon-bons pelting everybody
that shows himself,--the picture of a truly intellectual banquet is
one which the old Divinities might well have attempted to reproduce
in their--

--"Oh, oh, oh!" cried the young fellow whom they call John,--"that
is from one of your lectures!"

I know it, I replied,--I concede it, I confess it, I proclaim it.


"The trail of the serpent is over them all!"


All lecturers, all professors, all schoolmasters, have ruts and
grooves in their minds into which their conversation is perpetually
sliding.  Did you never, in riding through the woods of a still
June evening, suddenly feel that you had passed into a warm stratum
of air, and in a minute or two strike the chill layer of atmosphere
beyond?  Did you never, in cleaving the green waters of the Back
Bay,--where the Provincial blue-noses are in the habit of beating
the "Metropolitan" boat-clubs,--find yourself in a tepid streak, a
narrow, local gulf-stream, a gratuitous warm-bath a little
underdone, through which your glistening shoulders soon flashed, to
bring you back to the cold realities of full-sea temperature?  Just
so, in talking with any of the characters above referred to, one
not unfrequently finds a sudden change in the style of the
conversation.  The lack-lustre eye rayless as a Beacon-Street
door-plate in August, all at once fills with light; the face flings
itself wide open like the church-portals when the bride and
bridegroom enter; the little man grows in stature before your eyes,
like the small prisoner with hair on end, beloved yet dreaded of
early childhood; you were talking with a dwarf and an imbecile,
--you have a giant and a trumpet-tongued angel before you!--Nothing
but a streak out of a fifty-dollar lecture.--As when, at some
unlooked-for moment, the mighty fountain-column springs into the
air before the astonished passer-by,--silver-footed, diamond-
crowned, rainbow-scarfed,--from the bosom of that fair sheet,
sacred to the hymns of quiet batrachians at home, and the epigrams
of a less amiable and less elevated order of reptilia in other
latitudes.

--Who was that person that was so abused some time since for saying
that in the conflict of two races our sympathies naturally go with
the higher?  No matter who he was.  Now look at what is going on in
India,--a white, superior "Caucasian" race, against a dark-skinned,
inferior, but still "Caucasian" race,--and where are English and
American sympathies?  We can't stop to settle all the doubtful
questions; all we know is, that the brute nature is sure to come
out most strongly in the lower race, and it is the general law that
the human side of humanity should treat the brutal side as it does
the same nature in the inferior animals,--tame it or crush it.  The
India mail brings stories of women and children outraged and
murdered; the royal stronghold is in the hands of the babe-killers.
England takes down the Map of the World, which she has girdled with
empire, and makes a correction thus:  [DELPHI] Dele.  The civilized
world says, Amen.

--Do not think, because I talk to you of many subjects briefly,
that I should not find it much lazier work to take each one of them
and dilute it down to an essay.  Borrow some of my old college
themes and water my remarks to suit yourselves, as the Homeric
heroes did with their melas oinos,--that black sweet, syrupy wine
(?) which they used to alloy with three parts or more of the
flowing stream.  [Could it have been melasses, as Webster and his
provincials spell it,--or Molossa's, as dear old smattering,
chattering, would-be-College-President, Cotton Mather, has it in
the "Magnalia"?  Ponder thereon, ye small antiquaries who make
barn-door-fowl flights of learning in "Notes and Queries!"--ye
Historical Societies, in one of whose venerable triremes I, too,
ascend the stream of time, while other hands tug at the oars!--ye
Amines of parasitical literature, who pick up your grains of
native-grown food with a bodkin, having gorged upon less honest
fare, until, like the great minds Goethe speaks of, you have "made
a Golgotha" of your pages!--ponder thereon!]

--Before you go, this morning, I want to read you a copy of verses.
You will understand by the title that they are written in an
imaginary character.  I don't doubt they will fit some family-man
well enough.  I send it forth as "Oak Hall" projects a coat, on a
priori grounds of conviction that it will suit somebody.  There is
no loftier illustration of faith than this.  It believes that a
soul has been clad in flesh; that tender parents have fed and
nurtured it; that its mysterious compages or frame-work has
survived its myriad exposures and reached the stature of maturity;
that the Man, now self-determining, has given in his adhesion to
the traditions and habits of the race in favor of artificial
clothing; that he will, having all the world to choose from, select
the very locality where this audacious generalization has been
acted upon.  It builds a garment cut to the pattern of an Idea, and
trusts that Nature will model a material shape to fit it.  There is
a prophecy in every seam, and its pockets are full of inspiration.
--Now hear the verses.


THE OLD MAN DREAMS.


O for one hour of youthful joy!
Give back my twentieth spring!
I'd rather laugh a bright-haired boy
Than reign a gray-beard king!

Off with the wrinkled spoils of age!
Away with learning's crown!
Tear out life's wisdom-written page,
And dash its trophies down!

One moment let my life-blood stream
From boyhood's fount of flame!
Give me one giddy, reeling dream
Of life all love and fame!

--My listening angel heard the prayer,
And calmly smiling, said,
"If I but touch thy silvered hair,
Thy hasty wish hath sped.

"But is there nothing in thy track
To bid thee fondly stay,
While the swift seasons hurry back
To find the wished-for day?"

--Ah, truest soul of womankind!
Without thee, what were life?
One bliss I cannot leave behind:
I'll take--my--precious wife!

--The angel took a sapphire pen
And wrote in rainbow dew,
"The man would be a boy again,
And be a husband too!"

--"And is there nothing yet unsaid
Before the change appears?
Remember, all their gifts have fled
With those dissolving years!"

Why, yes; for memory would recall
My fond paternal joys;
I could not bear to leave them all;
I'll take--my--girl--and--boys!

The smiling angel dropped his pen,--
"Why this will never do;
The man would be a boy again,
And be a father too!"

And so I laughed,--my laughter woke
The household with its noise,--
And wrote my dream, when morning broke,
To please the gray-haired boys.



CHAPTER IV



[I am so well pleased with my boarding-house that I intend to
remain there, perhaps for years.  Of course I shall have a great
many conversations to report, and they will necessarily be of
different tone and on different subjects.  The talks are like the
breakfasts,--sometimes dipped toast, and sometimes dry.  You must
take them as they come.  How can I do what all these letters ask me
to?  No. 1. want serious and earnest thought.  No. 2. (letter
smells of bad cigars) must have more jokes; wants me to tell a
"good storey" which he has copied out for me.  (I suppose two
letters before the word "good" refer to some Doctor of Divinity who
told the story.)  No. 3. (in female hand)--more poetry.  No. 4.
wants something that would be of use to a practical man.
(Prahctical mahn he probably pronounces it.)  No. 5. (gilt-edged,
sweet-scented)--"more sentiment,"--"heart's outpourings."--

My dear friends, one and all, I can do nothing but report such
remarks as I happen to have made at our breakfast-table.  Their
character will depend on many accidents,--a good deal on the
particular persons in the company to whom they were addressed.  It
so happens that those which follow were mainly intended for the
divinity-student and the school-mistress; though others, whom I
need not mention, saw to interfere, with more or less propriety, in
the conversation.  This is one of my privileges as a talker; and of
course, if I was not talking for our whole company, I don't expect
all the readers of this periodical to be interested in my notes of
what was said.  Still, I think there may be a few that will rather
like this vein,--possibly prefer it to a livelier one,--serious
young men, and young women generally, in life's roseate parenthesis
from--years of age to--inclusive.

Another privilege of talking is to misquote.--Of course it wasn't
Proserpina that actually cut the yellow hair,--but Iris.  (As I
have since told you) it was the former lady's regular business, but
Dido had used herself ungenteelly, and Madame d'Enfer stood firm on
the point of etiquette.  So the bathycolpian Here--Juno, in Latin
--sent down Iris instead.  But I was mightily pleased to see that one
of the gentlemen that do the heavy articles for the celebrated
"Oceanic Miscellany" misquoted Campbell's line without any excuse.
"Waft us HOME the MESSAGE" of course it ought to be.  Will he be
duly grateful for the correction?]

--The more we study the body and the mind, the more we find both to
be governed, not by, but ACCORDING TO laws, such as we observe in
the larger universe.--You think you know all about WALKING,--don't
you, now?  Well, how do you suppose your lower limbs are held to
your body?  They are sucked up by two cupping vessels, ("cotyloid"
--cup-like--cavities,) and held there as long as you live, and
longer.  At any rate, you think you move them backward and forward
at such a rate as your will determines, don't you?--On the
contrary, they swing just as any other pendulums swing, at a fixed
rate, determined by their length.  You can alter this by muscular
power, as you can take hold of the pendulum of a clock and make it
move faster or slower; but your ordinary gait is timed by the same
mechanism as the movements of the solar system.

[My friend, the Professor, told me all this, referring me to
certain German physiologists by the name of Weber for proof of the
facts, which, however, he said he had often verified.  I
appropriated it to my own use; what can one do better than this,
when one has a friend that tells him anything worth remembering?

The Professor seems to think that man and the general powers of the
universe are in partnership.  Some one was saying that it had cost
nearly half a million to move the Leviathan only so far as they had
got it already.--Why,--said the Professor,--they might have hired
an EARTHQUAKE for less money!]

Just as we find a mathematical rule at the bottom of many of the
bodily movements, just so thought may be supposed to have its
regular cycles.  Such or such a thought comes round periodically,
in its turn.  Accidental suggestions, however, so far interfere
with the regular cycles, that we may find them practically beyond
our power of recognition.  Take all this for what it is worth, but
at any rate you will agree that there are certain particular
thoughts that do not come up once a day, nor once a week, but that
a year would hardly go round without your having them pass through
your mind.  Here is one which comes up at intervals in this way.
Some one speaks of it, and there is an instant and eager smile of
assent in the listener or listeners.  Yes, indeed; they have often
been struck by it.

ALL AT ONCE A CONVICTION FLASHES THROUGH US THAT WE HAVE BEEN IN
THE SAME PRECISE CIRCUMSTANCES AS AT THE PRESENT INSTANT, ONCE OR
MANY TIMES BEFORE.

O, dear, yes!--said one of the company,--everybody has had that
feeling.

The landlady didn't know anything about such notions; it was an
idee in folks' heads, she expected.

The schoolmistress said, in a hesitating sort of way, that she knew
the feeling well, and didn't like to experience it; it made her
think she was a ghost, sometimes.

The young fellow whom they call John said he knew all about it; he
had just lighted a cheroot the other day, when a tremendous
conviction all at once came over him that he had done just that
same thing ever so many times before.  I looked severely at him,
and his countenance immediately fell--ON THE SIDE TOWARD ME; I
cannot answer for the other, for he can wink and laugh with either
half of his face without the other half's knowing it.

--I have noticed--I went on to say--the following circumstances
connected with these sudden impressions.  First, that the condition
which seems to be the duplicate of a former one is often very
trivial,--one that might have presented itself a hundred times.
Secondly, that the impression is very evanescent, and that it is
rarely, if ever, recalled by any voluntary effort, at least after
any time has elapsed.  Thirdly, that there is a disinclination to
record the circumstances, and a sense of incapacity to reproduce
the state of mind in words.  Fourthly, I have often felt that the
duplicate condition had not only occurred once before, but that it
was familiar and, as it seemed, habitual.  Lastly, I have had the
same convictions in my dreams.

How do I account for it?--Why, there are several ways that I can
mention, and you may take your choice.  The first is that which the
young lady hinted at;--that these flashes are sudden recollections
of a previous existence.  I don't believe that; for I remember a
poor student I used to know told me he had such a conviction one
day when he was blacking his boots, and I can't think he had ever
lived in another world where they use Day and Martin.

Some think that Dr. Wigan's doctrine of the brain's being a double
organ, its hemispheres working together like the two eyes, accounts
for it.  One of the hemispheres hangs fire, they suppose, and the
small interval between the perceptions of the nimble and the
sluggish half seems an indefinitely long period, and therefore the
second perception appears to be the copy of another, ever so old.
But even allowing the centre of perception to be double, I can see
no good reason for supposing this indefinite lengthening of the
time, nor any analogy that bears it out.  It seems to me most
likely that the coincidence of circumstances is very partial, but
that we take this partial resemblance for identity, as we
occasionally do resemblances of persons.  A momentary posture of
circumstances is so far like some preceding one that we accept it
as exactly the same, just as we accost a stranger occasionally,
mistaking him for a friend.  The apparent similarity may be owing
perhaps, quite as much to the mental state at the time, as to the
outward circumstances.

--Here is another of these curiously recurring remarks.  I have
said it, and heard it many times, and occasionally met with
something like it in books,--somewhere in Bulwer's novels, I think,
and in one of the works of Mr. Olmsted, I know.

MEMORY, IMAGINATION, OLD SENTIMENTS AND ASSOCIATIONS, ARE MORE
READILY REACHED THROUGH THE SENSE OF SMELL THAN BY ALMOST ANY OTHER
CHANNEL.

Of course the particular odors which act upon each person's
susceptibilities differ.--O, yes!  I will tell you some of mine.
The smell of PHOSPHORUS is one of them.  During a year or two of
adolescence I used to be dabbling in chemistry a good deal, and as
about that time I had my little aspirations and passions like
another, some of these things got mixed up with each other:
orange-colored fumes of nitrous acid, and visions as bright and
transient; reddening litmus-paper, and blushing cheeks;--eheu!


"Soles occidere et redire possunt,"


but there is no reagent that will redden the faded roses of
eighteen hundred and--spare them!  But, as I was saying, phosphorus
fires this train of associations in an instant; its luminous vapors
with their penetrating odor throw me into a trance; it comes to me
in a double sense "trailing clouds of glory."  Only the confounded
Vienna matches, ohne phosphor-geruch, have worn my sensibilities a
little.

Then there is the MARIGOLD.  When I was of smallest dimensions, and
wont to ride impacted between the knees of fond parental pair, we
would sometimes cross the bridge to the next village-town and stop
opposite a low, brown, "gambrel-roofed" cottage.  Out of it would
come one Sally, sister of its swarthy tenant, swarthy herself,
shady-lipped, sad-voiced, and, bending over her flower-bed, would
gather a "posy," as she called it, for the little boy.  Sally lies
in the churchyard with a slab of blue slate at her head, lichen-
crusted, and leaning a little within the last few years.  Cottage,
garden-beds, posies, grenadier-like rows of seedling onions,
--stateliest of vegetables,--all are gone, but the breath of a
marigold brings them all back to me.

Perhaps the herb EVERLASTING, the fragrant immortelle of our autumn
fields, has the most suggestive odor to me of all those that set me
dreaming.  I can hardly describe the strange thoughts and emotions
that come to me as I inhale the aroma of its pale, dry, rustling
flowers.  A something it has of sepulchral spicery, as if it had
been brought from the core of some great pyramid, where it had lain
on the breast of a mummied Pharaoh.  Something, too, of immortality
in the sad, faint sweetness lingering so long in its lifeless
petals.  Yet this does not tell why it fills my eyes with tears and
carries me in blissful thought to the banks of asphodel that border
the River of Life.

--I should not have talked so much about these personal
susceptibilities, if I had not a remark to make about them which I
believe is a new one.  It is this.  There may be a physical reason
for the strange connection between the sense of smell and the mind.
The olfactory nerve--so my friend, the Professor, tells me--is the
only one directly connected with the hemispheres of the brain, the
parts in which, as we have every reason to believe, the
intellectual processes are performed.  To speak more truly the
olfactory "nerve" is not a nerve at all, he says, but a part of the
brain, in intimate connection with its anterior lobes.  Whether
this anatomical arrangement is at the bottom of the facts I have
mentioned, I will not decide, but it is curious enough to be worth
remembering.  Contrast the sense of taste, as a source of
suggestive impressions, with that of smell.  Now the Professor
assures me that you will find the nerve of taste has no immediate
connection with the brain proper, but only with the prolongation of
the spinal cord.

[The old gentleman opposite did not pay much attention, I think, to
this hypothesis of mine.  But while I was speaking about the sense
of smell he nestled about in his seat, and presently succeeded in
getting out a large red bandanna handkerchief.  Then he lurched a
little to the other side, and after much tribulation at last
extricated an ample round snuff-box.  I looked as he opened it and
felt for the wonted pugil.  Moist rappee, and a Tonka-bean lying
therein.  I made the manual sign understood of all mankind that use
the precious dust, and presently my brain, too, responded to the
long unused stimulus--O boys,--that were,--actual papas and
possible grandpapas,--some of you with crowns like billiard-balls,
--some in locks of sable silvered, and some of silver sabled,--do
you remember, as you doze over this, those after-dinners at the
Trois Freres when the Scotch-plaided snuff-box went round, and the
dry Lundy-Foot tickled its way along into our happy sensoria?  Then
it was that the Chambertin or the Clos Vougeot came in, slumbering
in its straw cradle.  And one among you,--do you remember how he
would have a bit of ice always in his Burgundy, and sit tinkling it
against the sides of the bubble-like glass, saying that he
was hearing the cow-bells as he used to hear them, when the
deep-breathing kine came home at twilight from the huckleberry
pasture, in the old home a thousand leagues towards the sunset?]

Ah me! what strains and strophes of unwritten verse pulsate through
my soul when I open a certain closet in the ancient house where I
was born!  On its shelves used to lie bundles of sweet-marjoram and
pennyroyal and lavender and mint and catnip; there apples were
stored until their seeds should grow black, which happy period
there were sharp little milk-teeth always ready to anticipate;
there peaches lay in the dark, thinking of the sunshine they had
lost, until, like the hearts of saints that dream of heaven in
their sorrow, they grew fragrant as the breath of angels.  The
odorous echo of a score of dead summers lingers yet in those dim
recesses.

--Do I remember Byron's line about "striking the electric chain"?
--To be sure I do.  I sometimes think the less the hint that stirs
the automatic machinery of association, the more easily this moves
us.  What can be more trivial than that old story of opening the
folio Shakspeare that used to lie in some ancient English hall and
finding the flakes of Christmas pastry between its leaves, shut up
in them perhaps a hundred years ago?  And, lo! as one looks on
these poor relics of a bygone generation, the universe changes in
the twinkling of an eye; old George the Second is back again, and
the elder Pitt is coming into power, and General Wolfe is a fine,
promising young man, and over the Channel they are pulling the
Sieur Damiens to pieces with wild horses, and across the Atlantic
the Indians are tomahawking Hirams and Jonathans and Jonases at
Fort William Henry; all the dead people who have been in the dust
so long--even to the stout-armed cook that made the pastry--are
alive again; the planet unwinds a hundred of its luminous coils,
and the precession of the equinoxes is retraced on the dial of
heaven!  And all this for a bit of pie-crust!

--I will thank you for that pie,--said the provoking young fellow
whom I have named repeatedly.  He looked at it for a moment, and
put his hands to his eyes as if moved.--I was thinking,--he said
indistinctly--

--How?  What is't?--said our landlady.

--I was thinking--said he--who was king of England when this old
pie was baked,--and it made me feel bad to think how long he must
have been dead.

[Our landlady is a decent body, poor, and a widow, of course; cela
va sans dire.  She told me her story once; it was as if a grain of
corn that had been ground and bolted had tried to individualize
itself by a special narrative.  There was the wooing and the
wedding,--the start in life,--the disappointments,--the children
she had buried,--the struggle against fate,--the dismantling of
life, first of its small luxuries, and then of its comforts,--the
broken spirits,--the altered character of the one on whom she
leaned,--and at last the death that came and drew the black curtain
between her and all her earthly hopes.

I never laughed at my landlady after she had told me her story, but
I often cried,--not those pattering tears that run off the eaves
upon our neighbors' grounds, the stillicidium of self-conscious
sentiment, but those which steal noiselessly through their conduits
until they reach the cisterns lying round about the heart; those
tears that we weep inwardly with unchanging features;--such I did
shed for her often when the imps of the boarding-house Inferno
tugged at her soul with their red-hot pincers.]

Young man,--I said,--the pasty you speak lightly of is not old, but
courtesy to those who labor to serve us, especially if they are of
the weaker sex, is very old, and yet well worth retaining.  May I
recommend to you the following caution, as a guide, whenever you
are dealing with a woman, or an artist, or a poet--if you are
handling an editor or politician, it is superfluous advice.  I take
it from the back of one of those little French toys which contain
pasteboard figures moved by a small running stream of fine sand;
Benjamin Franklin will translate it for you:  "Quoiqu'elle soit
tres solidement montee, il faut ne pas BRUTALISER la machine."--I
will thank you for the pie, if you please.

[I took more of it than was good for me--as much as 85 degrees, I
should think,--and had an indigestion in consequence.  While I was
suffering from it, I wrote some sadly desponding poems, and a
theological essay which took a very melancholy view of creation.
When I got better I labelled them all "Pie-crust," and laid them by
as scarecrows and solemn warnings.  I have a number of books on my
shelves that I should like to label with some such title; but, as
they have great names on their title-pages,--Doctors of Divinity,
some of them,--it wouldn't do.]

--My friend, the Professor, whom I have mentioned to you once or
twice, told me yesterday that somebody had been abusing him in some
of the journals of his calling.  I told him that I didn't doubt he
deserved it; that I hoped he did deserve a little abuse
occasionally, and would for a number of years to come; that nobody
could do anything to make his neighbors wiser or better without
being liable to abuse for it; especially that people hated to have
their little mistakes made fun of, and perhaps he had been doing
something of the kind.--The Professor smiled.--Now, said I, hear
what I am going to say.  It will not take many years to bring you
to the period of life when men, at least the majority of writing
and talking men, do nothing but praise.  Men, like peaches and
pears, grow sweet a little while before they begin to decay.  I
don't know what it is,--whether a spontaneous change, mental or
bodily, or whether it is thorough experience of the thanklessness
of critical honesty,--but it is a fact, that most writers, except
sour and unsuccessful ones, get tired of finding fault at about the
time when they are beginning to grow old.  As a general thing, I
would not give a great deal for the fair words of a critic, if he
is himself an author, over fifty years of age.  At thirty we are
all trying to cut our names in big letters upon the walls of this
tenement of life; twenty years later we have carved it, or shut up
our jack-knives.  Then we are ready to help others, and care less
to hinder any, because nobody's elbows are in our way.  So I am
glad you have a little life left; you will be saccharine enough in
a few years.

--Some of the softening effects of advancing age have struck me
very much in what I have heard or seen here and elsewhere.  I just
now spoke of the sweetening process that authors undergo.  Do you
know that in the gradual passage from maturity to helplessness the
harshest characters sometimes have a period in which they are
gentle and placid as young children?  I have heard it said, but I
cannot be sponsor for its truth, that the famous chieftain,
Lochiel, was rocked in a cradle like a baby, in his old age.  An
old man, whose studies had been of the severest scholastic kind,
used to love to hear little nursery-stories read over and over to
him.  One who saw the Duke of Wellington in his last years
describes him as very gentle in his aspect and demeanor.  I
remember a person of singularly stern and lofty bearing who became
remarkably gracious and easy in all his ways in the later period of
his life.

And that leads me to say that men often remind me of pears in their
way of coming to maturity.  Some are ripe at twenty, like human
Jargonelles, and must be made the most of, for their day is soon
over.  Some come into their perfect condition late, like the autumn
kinds, and they last better than the summer fruit.  And some, that,
like the Winter-Nelis, have been hard and uninviting until all the
rest have had their season, get their glow and perfume long after
the frost and snow have done their worst with the orchards.  Beware
of rash criticisms; the rough and stringent fruit you condemn may
be an autumn or a winter pear, and that which you picked up beneath
the same bough in August may have been only its worm-eaten
windfalls.  Milton was a Saint-Germain with a graft of the roseate
Early-Catherine.  Rich, juicy, lively, fragrant, russet skinned old
Chaucer was an Easter-Beurre; the buds of a new summer were
swelling when he ripened.

--There is no power I envy so much--said the divinity-student--as
that of seeing analogies and making comparisons.  I don't
understand how it is that some minds are continually coupling
thoughts or objects that seem not in the least related to each
other, until all at once they are put in a certain light, and you
wonder that you did not always see that they were as like as a pair
of twins.  It appears to me a sort of miraculous gift.

[He is rather a nice young man, and I think has an appreciation of
the higher mental qualities remarkable for one of his years and
training.  I try his head occasionally as housewives try eggs,
--give it an intellectual shake and hold it up to the light, so to
speak, to see if it has life in it, actual or potential, or only
contains lifeless albumen.]

You call it MIRACULOUS,--I replied,--tossing the expression with my
facial eminence, a little smartly, I fear.--Two men are walking by
the polyphloesboean ocean, one of them having a small tin cup with
which he can scoop up a gill of sea-water when he will, and the
other nothing but his hands, which will hardly hold water at all,
--and you call the tin cup a miraculous possession!  It is the ocean
that is the miracle, my infant apostle!  Nothing is clearer than
that all things are in all things, and that just according to the
intensity and extension of our mental being we shall see the many
in the one and the one in the many.  Did Sir Isaac think what he
was saying when he made HIS speech about the ocean,--the child and
the pebbles, you know?  Did he mean to speak slightingly of a
pebble?  Of a spherical solid which stood sentinel over its
compartment of space before the stone that became the pyramids had
grown solid, and has watched it until now!  A body which knows all
the currents of force that traverse the globe; which holds by
invisible threads to the ring of Saturn and the belt of Orion!  A
body from the contemplation of which an archangel could infer the
entire inorganic universe as the simplest of corollaries!  A throne
of the all-pervading Deity, who has guided its every atom since the
rosary of heaven was strung with beaded stars!

So,--to return to OUR walk by the ocean,--if all that poetry has
dreamed, all that insanity has raved, all that maddening narcotics
have driven through the brains of men, or smothered passion nursed
in the fancies of women,--if the dreams of colleges and convents
and boarding-schools,--if every human feeling that sighs, or
smiles, or curses, or shrieks, or groans, should bring all their
innumerable images, such as come with every hurried heart-beat,
--the epic which held them all, though its letters filled the zodiac,
would be but a cupful from the infinite ocean of similitudes and
analogies that rolls through the universe.

[The divinity-student honored himself by the way in which he
received this.  He did not swallow it at once, neither did he
reject it; but he took it as a pickerel takes the bait, and carried
it off with him to his hole (in the fourth story) to deal with at
his leisure.]

--Here is another remark made for his especial benefit.--There is a
natural tendency in many persons to run their adjectives together
in TRIADS, as I have heard them called,--thus:  He was honorable,
courteous, and brave; she was graceful, pleasing, and virtuous.
Dr. Johnson is famous for this; I think it was Bulwer who said you
could separate a paper in the "Rambler" into three distinct essays.
Many of our writers show the same tendency,--my friend, the
Professor, especially.  Some think it is in humble imitation of
Johnson,--some that it is for the sake of the stately sound only.
I don't think they get to the bottom of it.  It is, I suspect, an
instinctive and involuntary effort of the mind to present a thought
or image with the THREE DIMENSIONS that belong to every solid,--an
unconscious handling of an idea as if it had length, breadth, and
thickness.  It is a great deal easier to say this than to prove it,
and a great deal easier to dispute it than to disprove it.  But
mind this:  the more we observe and study, the wider we find the
range of the automatic and instinctive principles in body, mind,
and morals, and the narrower the limits of the self-determining
conscious movement.

--I have often seen piano-forte players and singers make such
strange motions over their instruments or song-books that I wanted
to laugh at them.  "Where did our friends pick up all these fine
ecstatic airs?" I would say to myself.  Then I would remember My
Lady in "Marriage a la Mode," and amuse myself with thinking how
affectation was the same thing in Hogarth's time and in our own.
But one day I bought me a Canary-bird and hung him up in a cage at
my window.  By-and-by he found himself at home, and began to pipe
his little tunes; and there he was, sure enough, swimming and
waving about, with all the droopings and liftings and languishing
side-turnings of the head that I had laughed at.  And now I should
like to ask, WHO taught him all this?--and me, through him, that
the foolish head was not the one swinging itself from side to side
and bowing and nodding over the music, but that other which was
passing its shallow and self-satisfied judgment on a creature made
of finer clay than the frame which carried that same head upon its
shoulders?

--Do you want an image of the human will, or the self-determining
principle, as compared with its prearranged and impassable
restrictions?  A drop of water, imprisoned in a crystal; you may
see such a one in any mineralogical collection.  One little fluid
particle in the crystalline prism of the solid universe!

--Weaken moral obligations?--No, not weaken, but define them.  When
I preach that sermon I spoke of the other day, I shall have to lay
down some principles not fully recognized in some of your
text-books.

I should have to begin with one most formidable preliminary.  You
saw an article the other day in one of the journals, perhaps, in
which some old Doctor or other said quietly that patients were very
apt to be fools and cowards.  But a great many of the clergyman's
patients are not only fools and cowards, but also liars.

[Immense sensation at the table.--Sudden retirement of the angular
female in oxydated bombazine.  Movement of adhesion--as they say in
the Chamber of Deputies--on the part of the young fellow they call
John.  Falling of the old-gentleman-opposite's lower jaw
--(gravitation is beginning to get the better of him.)  Our landlady
to Benjamin Franklin, briskly,--Go to school right off, there's a
good boy!  Schoolmistress curious,--takes a quick glance at
divinity-student.  Divinity-student slightly flushed draws his
shoulders back a little, as if a big falsehood--or truth--had hit
him in the forehead.  Myself calm.]

--I should not make such a speech as that, you know, without having
pretty substantial indorsers to fall back upon, in case my credit
should be disputed.  Will you run up stairs, Benjamin Franklin,
(for B. F. had NOT gone right off, of course,) and bring down a
small volume from the left upper corner of the right-hand shelves?

[Look at the precious little black, ribbed backed, clean-typed,
vellum-papered 32mo.  "DESIDERII ERASMI COLLOQUIA.  Amstelodami.
Typis Ludovici Elzevirii.  1650."  Various names written on
title-page.  Most conspicuous this:  Gul. Cookeson E. Coll. Omn.
Anim. 1725.  Oxon.

--O William Cookeson, of All-Souls College, Oxford,--then writing
as I now write,--now in the dust, where I shall lie,--is this line
all that remains to thee of earthly remembrance?  Thy name is at
least once more spoken by living men;--is it a pleasure to thee?
Thou shalt share with me my little draught of immortality,--its
week, its month, its year,--whatever it may be,--and then we will
go together into the solemn archives of Oblivion's Uncatalogued
Library!]

--If you think I have used rather strong language, I shall have to
read something to you out of the book of this keen and witty
scholar,--the great Erasmus,--who "laid the egg of the Reformation
which Luther hatched."  Oh, you never read his Naufragium, or
"Shipwreck," did you?  Of course not; for, if you had, I don't
think you would have given me credit--or discredit--for entire
originality in that speech of mine.  That men are cowards in the
contemplation of futurity he illustrates by the extraordinary
antics of many on board the sinking vessel; that they are fools, by
their praying to the sea, and making promises to bits of wood from
the true cross, and all manner of similar nonsense; that they are
fools, cowards, and liars all at once, by this story:  I will put
it into rough English for you.--"I couldn't help laughing to hear
one fellow bawling out, so that he might be sure to be heard, a
promise to Saint Christopher of Paris--the monstrous statue in the
great church there--that he would give him a wax taper as big as
himself.  'Mind what you promise!' said an acquaintance that stood
near him, poking him with his elbow; 'you couldn't pay for it, if
you sold all your things at auction.'  'Hold your tongue, you
donkey!' said the fellow,--but softly, so that Saint Christopher
should not hear him,--'do you think I'm in earnest?  If I once get
my foot on dry ground, catch me giving him so much as a tallow
candle!'"

Now, therefore, remembering that those who have been loudest in
their talk about the great subject of which we were speaking have
not necessarily been wise, brave, and true men, but, on the
contrary, have very often been wanting in one or two or all of the
qualities these words imply, I should expect to find a good many
doctrines current in the schools which I should be obliged to call
foolish, cowardly, and false.

--So you would abuse other people's beliefs, Sir, and yet not tell
us your own creed!--said the divinity-student, coloring up with a
spirit for which I liked him all the better.

--I have a creed,--I replied;--none better, and none shorter.  It
is told in two words,--the two first of the Paternoster.  And when
I say these words I mean them.  And when I compared the human will
to a drop in a crystal, and said I meant to DEFINE moral
obligations, and not weaken them, this was what I intended to
express:  that the fluent, self-determining power of human beings
is a very strictly limited agency in the universe.  The chief
planes of its enclosing solid are, of course, organization,
education, condition.  Organization may reduce the power of the
will to nothing, as in some idiots; and from this zero the scale
mounts upwards by slight gradations.  Education is only second to
nature.  Imagine all the infants born this year in Boston and
Timbuctoo to change places!  Condition does less, but "Give me
neither poverty nor riches" was the prayer of Agur, and with good
reason.  If there is any improvement in modern theology, it is in
getting out of the region of pure abstractions and taking these
every-day working forces into account.  The great theological
question now heaving and throbbing in the minds of Christian men is
this:-

No, I wont talk about these things now.  My remarks might be
repeated, and it would give my friends pain to see with what
personal incivilities I should be visited.  Besides, what business
has a mere boarder to be talking about such things at a breakfast-
table?  Let him make puns.  To be sure, he was brought up among the
Christian fathers, and learned his alphabet out of a quarto
"Concilium Tridentinum."  He has also heard many thousand
theological lectures by men of various denominations; and it is not
at all to the credit of these teachers, if he is not fit by this
time to express an opinion on theological matters.

I know well enough that there are some of you who had a great deal
rather see me stand on my head than use it for any purpose of
thought.  Does not my friend, the Professor, receive at least two
letters a week, requesting him to. . . . ,--on the strength of some
youthful antic of his, which, no doubt, authorizes the intelligent
constituency of autograph-hunters to address him as a harlequin?

--Well, I can't be savage with you for wanting to laugh, and I like
to make you laugh, well enough, when I can.  But then observe this:
if the sense of the ridiculous is one side of an impressible
nature, it is very well; but if that is all there is in a man, he
had better have been an ape at once, and so have stood at the head
of his profession.  Laughter and tears are meant to turn the wheels
of the same machinery of sensibility; one is wind-power, and the
other water-power; that is all.  I have often heard the Professor
talk about hysterics as being Nature's cleverest illustration of
the reciprocal convertibility of the two states of which these acts
are the manifestations; But you may see it every day in children;
and if you want to choke with stifled tears at sight of the
transition, as it shows itself in older years, go and see Mr. Blake
play JESSE RURAL.

It is a very dangerous thing for a literary man to indulge his love
for the ridiculous.  People laugh WITH him just so long as he
amuses them; but if he attempts to be serious, they must still have
their laugh, and so they laugh AT him.  There is in addition,
however, a deeper reason for this than would at first appear.  Do
you know that you feel a little superior to every man who makes you
laugh, whether by making faces or verses?  Are you aware that you
have a pleasant sense of patronizing him, when you condescend so
far as to let him turn somersets, literal or literary, for your
royal delight?  Now if a man can only be allowed to stand on a
dais, or raised platform, and look down on his neighbor who is
exerting his talent for him, oh, it is all right!--first-rate
performance!--and all the rest of the fine phrases.  But if all at
once the performer asks the gentleman to come upon the floor, and,
stepping upon the platform, begins to talk down at him,--ah, that
wasn't in the programme!

I have never forgotten what happened when Sydney Smith--who, as
everybody knows, was an exceedingly sensible man, and a gentleman,
every inch of him--ventured to preach a sermon on the Duties of
Royalty.  The "Quarterly," "so savage and tartarly," came down upon
him in the most contemptuous style, as "a joker of jokes," a
"diner-out of the first water," in one of his own phrases; sneering
at him, insulting him, as nothing but a toady of a court, sneaking
behind the anonymous, would ever have been mean enough to do to a
man of his position and genius, or to any decent person even.--If I
were giving advice to a young fellow of talent, with two or three
facets to his mind, I would tell him by all means to keep his wit
in the background until after he had made a reputation by his more
solid qualities.  And so to an actor:  Hamlet first, and Bob Logic
afterwards, if you like; but don't think, as they say poor Liston
used to, that people will be ready to allow that you can do
anything great with Macbeth's dagger after flourishing about with
Paul Pry's umbrella.  Do you know, too, that the majority of men
look upon all who challenge their attention,--for a while, at
least,--as beggars, and nuisances?  They always try to get off as
cheaply as they can; and the cheapest of all things they can give a
literary man--pardon the forlorn pleasantry!--is the FUNNY-bone.
That is all very well so far as it goes, but satisfies no man, and
makes a good many angry, as I told you on a former occasion.

--Oh, indeed, no!--I am not ashamed to make you laugh,
occasionally.  I think I could read you something I have in my desk
which would probably make you smile.  Perhaps I will read it one of
these days, if you are patient with me when I am sentimental and
reflective; not just now.  The ludicrous has its place in the
universe; it is not a human invention, but one of the Divine ideas,
illustrated in the practical jokes of kittens and monkeys long
before Aristophanes or Shakspeare.  How curious it is that we
always consider solemnity and the absence of all gay surprises and
encounter of wits as essential to the idea of the future life of
those whom we thus deprive of half their faculties and then call
BLESSED!  There are not a few who, even in this life, seem to be
preparing themselves for that smileless eternity to which they look
forward, by banishing all gayety from their hearts and all
joyousness from their countenances.  I meet one such in the street
not unfrequently, a person of intelligence and education, but who
gives me (and all that he passes) such a rayless and chilling look
of recognition,--something as if he were one of Heaven's assessors,
come down to "doom" every acquaintance he met,--that I have
sometimes begun to sneeze on the spot, and gone home with a violent
cold, dating from that instant.  I don't doubt he would cut his
kitten's tail off, if he caught her playing with it.  Please tell
me, who taught her to play with it?

No, no!--give me a chance to talk to you, my fellow-boarders, and
you need not be afraid that I shall have any scruples about
entertaining you, if I can do it, as well as giving you some of my
serious thoughts, and perhaps my sadder fancies.  I know nothing in
English or any other literature more admirable than that sentiment
of Sir Thomas Browne "EVERY MAN TRULY LIVES, SO LONG AS HE ACTS HIS
NATURE, OR SOME WAY MAKES GOOD THE FACULTIES OF HIMSELF."

I find the great thing in this world is not so much where we stand,
as in what direction we are moving:  To reach the port of heaven,
we must sail sometimes with the wind and sometimes against it,--but
we must sail, and not drift, nor lie at anchor.  There is one very
sad thing in old friendships, to every mind that is really moving
onward.  It is this:  that one cannot help using his early friends
as the seaman uses the log, to mark his progress.  Every now and
then we throw an old schoolmate over the stern with a string of
thought tied to him, and look--I am afraid with a kind of luxurious
and sanctimonious compassion--to see the rate at which the string
reels off, while he lies there bobbing up and down, poor fellow!
and we are dashing along with the white foam and bright sparkle at
our bows;--the ruffled bosom of prosperity and progress, with a
sprig of diamonds stuck in it!  But this is only the sentimental
side of the matter; for grow we must, if we outgrow all that we
love.

Don't misunderstand that metaphor of heaving the log, I beg you.
It is merely a smart way of saying that we cannot avoid measuring
our rate of movement by those with whom we have long been in the
habit of comparing ourselves; and when they once become stationary,
we can get our reckoning from them with painful accuracy.  We see
just what we were when they were our peers, and can strike the
balance between that and whatever we may feel ourselves to be now.
No doubt we may sometimes be mistaken.  If we change our last
simile to that very old and familiar one of a fleet leaving the
harbor and sailing in company for some distant region, we can get
what we want out of it.  There is one of our companions;--her
streamers were torn into rags before she had got into the open sea,
then by and by her sails blew out of the ropes one after another,
the waves swept her deck, and as night came on we left her a
seeming wreck, as we flew under our pyramid of canvas.  But lo! at
dawn she is still in sight,--it may be in advance of us.  Some deep
ocean-current has been moving her on, strong, but silent,--yes,
stronger than these noisy winds that puff our sails until they are
swollen as the cheeks of jubilant cherubim.  And when at last the
black steam-tug with the skeleton arms, which comes out of the mist
sooner or later and takes us all in tow, grapples her and goes off
panting and groaning with her, it is to that harbor where all
wrecks are refitted, and where, alas! we, towering in our pride,
may never come.

So you will not think I mean to speak lightly of old friendships,
because we cannot help instituting comparisons between our present
and former selves by the aid of those who were what we were, but
are not what we are.  Nothing strikes one more, in the race of
life, than to see how many give out in the first half of the
course.  "Commencement day" always reminds me of the start for the
"Derby," when the beautiful high-bred three-year olds of the season
are brought up for trial.  That day is the start, and life is the
race.  Here we are at Cambridge, and a class is just "graduating."
Poor Harry! he was to have been there too, but he has paid forfeit;
step out here into the grass back of the church; ah! there it is:-


"HUNC LAPIDEM POSUERUNT
SOCII MOERENTES."


But this is the start, and here they are,--coats bright as silk,
and manes as smooth as eau lustrale can make them.  Some of the
best of the colts are pranced round, a few minutes each, to show
their paces.  What is that old gentleman crying about? and the old
lady by him, and the three girls, what are they all covering their
eyes for?  Oh, that is THEIR colt which has just been trotted up on
the stage.  Do they really think those little thin legs can do
anything in such a slashing sweepstakes as is coming off in these
next forty years?  Oh, this terrible gift of second-sight that
comes to some of us when we begin to look through the silvered
rings of the arcus senilis!

TEN YEARS GONE.  First turn in the race.  A few broken down; two or
three bolted.  Several show in advance of the ruck.  CASSOCK, a
black colt, seems to be ahead of the rest; those black colts
commonly get the start, I have noticed, of the others, in the first
quarter.  METEOR has pulled up.

TWENTY YEARS.  Second corner turned.  CASSOCK has dropped from the
front, and JUDEX, an iron-gray, has the lead.  But look! how they
have thinned out!  Down flat,--five,--six,--how many?  They lie
still enough! they will not get up again in this race, be very
sure!  And the rest of them, what a "tailing off"!  Anybody can see
who is going to win,--perhaps.

THIRTY YEARS.  Third corner turned.  DIVES, bright sorrel, ridden
by the fellow in a yellow jacket, begins to make play fast; is
getting to be the favourite with many.  But who is that other one
that has been lengthening his stride from the first, and now shows
close up to the front?  Don't you remember the quiet brown colt
ASTEROID, with the star in his forehead?  That is he; he is one of
the sort that lasts; look out for him!  The black "colt," as we
used to call him, is in the background, taking it easily in a
gentle trot.  There is one they used to call THE FILLY, on account
of a certain feminine air he had; well up, you see; the Filly is
not to be despised my boy!

FORTY YEARS.  More dropping off,--but places much as before.

FIFTY YEARS.  Race over.  All that are on the course are coming in
at a walk; no more running.  Who is ahead?  Ahead?  What! and the
winning-post a slab of white or gray stone standing out from that
turf where there is no more jockeying or straining for victory!
Well, the world marks their places in its betting-book; but be sure
that these matter very little, if they have run as well as they
knew how!

--Did I not say to you a little while ago that the universe swam in
an ocean of similitudes and analogies?  I will not quote Cowley, or
Burns, or Wordsworth, just now, to show you what thoughts were
suggested to them by the simplest natural objects, such as a flower
or a leaf; but I will read you a few lines, if you do not object,
suggested by looking at a section of one of those chambered shells
to which is given the name of Pearly Nautilus.  We need not trouble
ourselves about the distinction between this and the Paper
Nautilus, the Argonauta of the ancients.  The name applied to both
shows that each has long been compared to a ship, as you may see
more fully in Webster's Dictionary, or the "Encyclopedia," to which
he refers.  If you will look into Roget's Bridgewater Treatise, you
will find a figure of one of these shells, and a section of it.
The last will show you the series of enlarging compartments
successively dwelt in by the animal that inhabits the shell, which
is built in a widening spiral.  Can you find no lesson in this?


THE CHAMBERED NAUTILUS.

This is the ship of pearl, which, poets feign,
Sails the unshadowed main,--
The venturous bark that flings
On the sweet summer wind its purpled wings
In gulfs enchanted, where the siren sings,
And coral reefs lie bare,
Where the cold sea-maids rise to sun their streaming hair

Its webs of living gauze no more unfurl;
Wrecked is the ship of pearl!
And every clambered cell,
Where its dim dreaming life was wont to dwell,
As the frail tenant shaped his growing shell,
Before thee lies revealed,--
Its irised ceiling rent, its sunless crypt unsealed!

Year after year beheld the silent toil
That spread his lustrous coil;
Still, as the spiral grew,
He left the past year's dwelling for the new,
Stole with soft step its shining archway through,
Built up its idle door,
Stretched in his last-found home, and knew the old no more.

Thanks for the heavenly message brought by thee,
Child of the wandering sea,
Cast from her lap forlorn!
From thy dead lips a clearer note is born
Than ever Triton blew from wreathed horn!
While on mine ear it rings,
Through the deep caves of thought I hear a voice that sings:-

Build thee more stately mansions, O my soul,
As the swift seasons roll!
Leave thy low-vaulted past!
Let each new temple, nobler than the last,
Shut thee from heaven with a dome more vast,
Till thou at length art free,
Leaving thine outgrown shell by life's unresting sea!



CHAPTER V



A lyric conception--my friend, the Poet, said--hits me like a
bullet in the forehead.  I have often had the blood drop from my
cheeks when it struck, and felt that I turned as white as death.
Then comes a creeping as of centipedes running down the spine,
--then a gasp and a great jump of the heart,--then a sudden flush and
a beating in the vessels of the head,--then a long sigh,--and the
poem is written.

It is an impromptu, I suppose, then, if you write it so suddenly,
--I replied.

No,--said he,--far from it.  I said written, but I did not say
COPIED.  Every such poem has a soul and a body, and it is the body
of it, or the copy, that men read and publishers pay for.  The soul
of it is born in an instant in the poet's soul.  It comes to him a
thought, tangled in the meshes of a few sweet words,--words that
have loved each other from the cradle of the language, but have
never been wedded until now.  Whether it will ever fully embody
itself in a bridal train of a dozen stanzas or not is uncertain;
but it exists potentially from the instant that the poet turns pale
with it.  It is enough to stun and scare anybody, to have a hot
thought come crashing into his brain, and ploughing up those
parallel ruts where the wagon trains of common ideas were jogging
along in their regular sequences of association.  No wonder the
ancients made the poetical impulse wholly external.  [Greek text
which cannot be reproduced].  Goddess,--Muse,--divine afflatus,
--something outside always.  _I_ never wrote any verses worth
reading.  I can't.  I am too stupid.  If I ever copied any that
were worth reading, I was only a medium.

[I was talking all this time to our boarders, you understand,
--telling them what this poet told me.  The company listened rather
attentively, I thought, considering the literary character of the
remarks.]

The old gentleman opposite all at once asked me if I ever read
anything better than Pope's "Essay on Man"?  Had I ever perused
McFingal?  He was fond of poetry when he was a boy,--his mother
taught him to say many little pieces,--he remembered one beautiful
hymn;--and the old gentleman began, in a clear, loud voice, for his
years,--


"The spacious firmament on high,
With all the blue ethereal sky,
And spangled heavens,"--


He stopped, as if startled by our silence, and a faint flush ran up
beneath the thin white hairs that fell upon his cheek.  As I looked
round, I was reminded of a show I once saw at the Museum,--the
Sleeping Beauty, I think they called it.  The old man's sudden
breaking out in this way turned every face towards him, and each
kept his posture as if changed to stone.  Our Celtic Bridget, or
Biddy, is not a foolish fat scullion to burst out crying for a
sentiment.  She is of the serviceable, red-handed, broad-and-high-
shouldered type; one of those imported female servants who are
known in public by their amorphous style of person, their stoop
forwards, and a headlong and as it were precipitous walk,--the
waist plunging downwards into the rocking pelvis at every heavy
footfall.  Bridget, constituted for action, not for emotion, was
about to deposit a plate heaped with something upon the table, when
I saw the coarse arm stretched by my shoulder arrested,--motionless
as the arm of a terra-cotta caryatid; she couldn't set the plate
down while the old gentleman was speaking!

He was quite silent after this, still wearing the slight flush on
his cheek.  Don't ever think the poetry is dead in an old man
because his forehead is wrinkled, or that his manhood has left him
when his hand trembles!  If they ever WERE there, they ARE there
still!

By and by we got talking again.--Does a poet love the verses
written through him, do you think, Sir?--said the divinity-student.

So long as they are warm from his mind, carry any of his animal
heat about them, _I_ KNOW he loves them,--I answered.  When they
have had time to cool, he is more indifferent.

A good deal as it is with buckwheat cakes,--said the young fellow
whom they call John.

The last words, only, reached the ear of the economically organized
female in black bombazine .--Buckwheat is skerce and high,--she
remarked.  [Must be a poor relation sponging on our landlady,--pays
nothing,--so she must stand by the guns and be ready to repel
boarders.]

I liked the turn the conversation had taken, for I had some things
I wanted to say, and so, after waiting a minute, I began again.--I
don't think the poems I read you sometimes can be fairly
appreciated, given to you as they are in the green state.

--You don't know what I mean by the GREEN STATE?  Well, then, I
will tell you.  Certain things are good for nothing until they have
been kept a long while; and some are good for nothing until they
have been long kept and USED.  Of the first, wine is the
illustrious and immortal example.  Of those which must be kept and
used I will name three,--meerschaum pipes, violins, and poems.  The
meerschaum is but a poor affair until it has burned a thousand
offerings to the cloud-compelling deities.  It comes to us without
complexion or flavor,--born of the sea-foam, like Aphrodite, but
colorless as pallida Mors herself.  The fire is lighted in its
central shrine, and gradually the juices which the broad leaves of
the Great Vegetable had sucked up from an acre and curdled into a
drachm are diffused through its thirsting pores.  First a
discoloration, then a stain, and at last a rich, glowing, umber
tint spreading over the whole surface.  Nature true to her old
brown autumnal hue, you see,--as true in the fire of the meerschaum
as in the sunshine of October!  And then the cumulative wealth of
its fragrant reminiscences! he who inhales its vapors takes a
thousand whiffs in a single breath; and one cannot touch it without
awakening the old joys that hang around it as the smell of flowers
clings to the dresses of the daughters of the house of Farina!

[Don't think I use a meerschaum myself, for _I_ DO NOT, though I
have owned a calumet since my childhood, which from a naked Pict
(of the Mohawk species) my grandsire won, together with a tomahawk
and beaded knife-sheath; paying for the lot with a bullet-mark on
his right check.  On the maternal side I inherit the loveliest
silver-mounted tobacco-stopper you ever saw.  It is a little
box-wood Triton, carved with charming liveliness and truth; I have
often compared it to a figure in Raphael's "Triumph of Galatea."
It came to me in an ancient shagreen case,--how old it is I do not
know,--but it must have been made since Sir Walter Raleigh's time.
If you are curious, you shall see it any day.  Neither will I
pretend that I am so unused to the more perishable smoking
contrivance that a few whiffs would make me feel as if I lay in a
ground-swell on the Bay of Biscay.  I am not unacquainted with that
fusiform, spiral-wound bundle of chopped stems and miscellaneous
incombustibles, the CIGAR, so called, of the shops,--which to
"draw" asks the suction-power of a nursling infant Hercules, and to
relish, the leathery palate of an old Silenus.  I do not advise
you, young man, even if my illustration strike your fancy, to
consecrate the flower of your life to painting the bowl of a pipe,
for, let me assure you, the stain of a reverie-breeding narcotic
may strike deeper than you think for.  I have seen the green leaf
of early promise grow brown before its time under such Nicotian
regimen, and thought the umbered meerschaum was dearly bought at
the cost of a brain enfeebled and a will enslaved.]

Violins, too,--the sweet old Amati!--the divine Stradivarius!
Played on by ancient maestros until the bow-hand lost its power and
the flying fingers stiffened.  Bequeathed to the passionate, young
enthusiast, who made it whisper his hidden love, and cry his
inarticulate longings, and scream his untold agonies, and wail his
monotonous despair.  Passed from his dying hand to the cold
virtuoso, who let it slumber in its case for a generation, till,
when his hoard was broken up, it came forth once more and rode the
stormy symphonies of royal orchestras, beneath the rushing bow of
their lord and leader.  Into lonely prisons with improvident
artists; into convents from which arose, day and night, the holy
hymns with which its tones were blended; and back again to orgies
in which it learned to howl and laugh as if a legion of devils were
shut up in it; then again to the gentle dilettante who calmed it
down with easy melodies until it answered him softly as in the days
of the old maestros.  And so given into our hands, its pores all
full of music; stained, like the meerschaum, through and through,
with the concentrated hue and sweetness of all the harmonies which
have kindled and faded on its strings.

Now I tell you a poem must be kept AND USED, like a meerschaum, or
a violin.  A poem is just as porous as the meerschaum;--the more
porous it is, the better.  I mean to say that a genuine poem is
capable of absorbing an indefinite amount of the essence of our own
humanity,--its tenderness, its heroism, its regrets, its
aspirations, so as to be gradually stained through with a divine
secondary color derived from ourselves.  So you see it must take
time to bring the sentiment of a poem into harmony with our nature,
by staining ourselves through every thought and image our being can
penetrate.

Then again as to the mere music of a new poem; why, who can expect
anything more from that than from the music of a violin fresh from
the maker's hands?  Now you know very well that there are no less
than fifty-eight different pieces in a violin.  These pieces are
strangers to each other, and it takes a century, more or less, to
make them thoroughly acquainted.  At last they learn to vibrate in
harmony, and the instrument becomes an organic whole, as if it were
a great seed-capsule which had grown from a garden-bed in Cremona,
or elsewhere.  Besides, the wood is juicy and full of sap for fifty
years or so, but at the end of fifty or a hundred more gets
tolerably dry and comparatively resonant.

Don't you see that all this is just as true of a poem?  Counting
each word as a piece, there are more pieces in an average copy of
verses than in a violin.  The poet has forced all these words
together, and fastened them, and they don't understand it at first.
But let the poem be repeated aloud and murmured over in the mind's
muffled whisper often enough, and at length the parts become knit
together in such absolute solidarity that you could not change a
syllable without the whole world's crying out against you for
meddling with the harmonious fabric.  Observe, too, how the drying
process takes place in the stuff of a poem just as in that of a
violin.  Here is a Tyrolese fiddle that is just coming to its
hundredth birthday,--(Pedro Klauss, Tyroli, fecit, 1760,)--the sap
is pretty well out of it.  And here is the song of an old poet whom
Neaera cheated.--


"Nox erat, et coelo fulgebat Luna sereno
Inter minora sidera,
Cum tu magnorum numen laesura deorum
In verba jurabas mea."


Don't you perceive the sonorousness of these old dead Latin
phrases?  Now I tell you that, every word fresh from the dictionary
brings with it a certain succulence; and though I cannot expect the
sheets of the "Pactolian," in which, as I told you, I sometimes
print my verses, to get so dry as the crisp papyrus that held those
words of Horatius Flaccus, yet you may be sure, that, while the
sheets are damp, and while the lines hold their sap, you can't
fairly judge of my performances, and that, if made of the true
stuff, they will ring better after a while.

[There was silence for a brief space, after my somewhat elaborate
exposition of these self-evident analogies.  Presently A PERSON
turned towards me--I do not choose to designate the individual--and
said that he rather expected my pieces had given pretty good
"sahtisfahction."--I had, up to this moment, considered this
complimentary phrase as sacred to the use of secretaries of
lyceums, and, as it has been usually accompanied by a small
pecuniary testimonial, have acquired a certain relish for this
moderately tepid and unstimulating expression of enthusiasm.  But
as a reward for gratuitous services, I confess I thought it a
little below that blood-heat standard which a man's breath ought to
have, whether silent, or vocal and articulate.  I waited for a
favorable opportunity, however, before making the remarks which
follow.]

--There are single expressions, as I have told you already, that
fix a man's position for you before you have done shaking hands
with him.  Allow me to expand a little.  There are several things,
very slight in themselves, yet implying other things not so
unimportant.  Thus, your French servant has devalise your premises
and got caught.  Excusez, says the sergent-de-ville, as he politely
relieves him of his upper garments and displays his bust in the
full daylight.  Good shoulders enough,--a little marked,--traces of
smallpox, perhaps,--but white. . . . . Crac! from the sergent-de-
ville's broad palm on the white shoulder!  Now look!  Vogue la
galere!  Out comes the big red V--mark of the hot iron;--he had
blistered it out pretty nearly,--hadn't he?--the old rascal VOLEUR,
branded in the galleys at Marseilles!  [Don't!  What if he has got
something like this?--nobody supposes I INVENTED such a story.]

My man John, who used to drive two of those six equine females
which I told you I had owned,--for, look you, my friends, simple
though I stand here, I am one that has been driven in his
"kerridge,"--not using that term, as liberal shepherds do, for any
battered old shabby-genteel go-cart which has more than one wheel,
but meaning thereby a four-wheeled vehicle WITH A POLE,--my man
John, I say, was a retired soldier.  He retired unostentatiously,
as many of Her Majesty's modest servants have done before and
since.  John told me, that when an officer thinks he recognizes one
of these retiring heroes, and would know if he has really been in
the service, that he may restore him, if possible, to a grateful
country, he comes suddenly upon him, and says, sharply, "Strap!"
If he has ever worn the shoulder-strap, he has learned the
reprimand for its ill adjustment.  The old word of command flashes
through his muscles, and his hand goes up in an instant to the
place where the strap used to be.

[I was all the time preparing for my grand coup, you understand;
but I saw they were not quite ready for it, and so continued,
--always in illustration of the general principle I had laid down.]

Yes, odd things come out in ways that nobody thinks of.  There was
a legend, that, when the Danish pirates made descents upon the
English coast, they caught a few Tartars occasionally, in the shape
of Saxons, who would not let them go,--on the contrary, insisted on
their staying, and, to make sure of it, treated them as Apollo
treated Marsyas, or an Bartholinus has treated a fellow-creature in
his title-page, and, having divested them of the one essential and
perfectly fitting garment, indispensable in the mildest climates,
nailed the same on the church-door as we do the banns of marriage,
in terrorem.

[There was a laugh at this among some of the young folks; but as I
looked at our landlady, I saw that "the water stood in her eyes,"
as it did in Christiana's when the interpreter asked her about the
spider, and I fancied, but wasn't quite sure that the
schoolmistress blushed, as Mercy did in the same conversation, as
you remember.]

That sounds like a cock-and-bull-story,--said the young fellow whom
they call John.  I abstained from making Hamlet's remark to
Horatio, and continued.

Not long since, the church-wardens were repairing and beautifying
an old Saxon church in a certain English village, and among other
things thought the doors should be attended to.  One of them
particularly, the front-door, looked very badly, crusted, as it
were, and as if it would be all the better for scraping.  There
happened to be a microscopist in the village who had heard the old
pirate story, and he took it into his head to examine the crust on
this door.  There was no mistake about it; it was a genuine
historical document, of the Ziska drum-head pattern,--a real cutis
humana, stripped from some old Scandinavian filibuster, and the
legend was true.

My friend, the Professor, settled an important historical and
financial question once by the aid of an exceedingly minute
fragment of a similar document.  Behind the pane of plate-glass
which bore his name and title burned a modest lamp, signifying to
the passers-by that at all hours of the night the slightest favors
(or fevers) were welcome.  A youth who had freely partaken of the
cup which cheers and likewise inebriates, following a moth-like
impulse very natural under the circumstances, dashed his fist at
the light and quenched the meek luminary,--breaking through the
plate-glass, of course, to reach it.  Now I don't want to go into
minutiae at table, you know, but a naked hand can no more go
through a pane of thick glass without leaving some of its cuticle,
to say the least, behind it, than a butterfly can go through a
sausage-machine without looking the worse for it.  The Professor
gathered up the fragments of glass, and with them certain very
minute but entirely satisfactory documents which would have
identified and hanged any rogue in Christendom who had parted with
them.--The historical question, WHO DID IT? and the financial
question, WHO PAID FOR IT? were both settled before the new lamp
was lighted the next evening.

You see, my friends, what immense conclusions, touching our lives,
our fortunes, and our sacred honor, may be reached by means of very
insignificant premises.  This is eminently true of manners and
forms of speech; a movement or a phrase often tells you all you
want to know about a person.  Thus, "How's your health?" (commonly
pronounced haalth)--instead of, How do you do? or, How are you?
Or calling your little dark entry a "hall," and your old rickety
one-horse wagon a "kerridge."  Or telling a person who has been trying
to please you that he has given you pretty good "sahtisfahction."
Or saying that you "remember of" such a thing, or that you have
been "stoppin"' at Deacon Somebody's,--and other such expressions.
One of my friends had a little marble statuette of Cupid in the
parlor of his country-house,--bow, arrows, wings, and all complete.
A visitor, indigenous to the region, looking pensively at the
figure, asked the lady of the house "if that was a statoo of her
deceased infant?"  What a delicious, though somewhat voluminous
biography, social, educational, and aesthetic in that brief
question!

[Please observe with what Machiavellian astuteness I smuggled in
the particular offence which it was my object to hold up to my
fellow-boarders, without too personal an attack on the individual
at whose door it lay.]

That was an exceedingly dull person who made the remark, Ex pede
Herculem.  He might as well have said, "From a peck of apples you
may judge of the barrel."  Ex PEDE, to be sure!  Read, instead, Ex
ungue minimi digiti pedis, Herculem, ejusque patrem, matrem, avos
et proavos, filios, nepotes et pronepotes!  Talk to me about your
[Greek text which cannot be reproduced]!  Tell me about Cuvier's
getting up a megatherium from a tooth, or Agassiz's drawing a
portrait of an undiscovered fish from a single scale!  As the "O"
revealed Giotto,--as the one word "moi" betrayed the Stratford
atte-Bowe-taught Anglais,--so all a man's antecedents and
possibilities are summed up in a single utterance which gives at
once the gauge of his education and his mental organization.

Possibilities, Sir?--said the divinity-student; can't a man who
says Haow? arrive at distinction?

Sir,--I replied,--in a republic all things are possible.  But the
man WITH A FUTURE has almost of necessity sense enough to see that
any odious trick of speech or manners must be got rid of.  Doesn't
Sydney Smith say that a public man in England never gets over a
false quantity uttered in early life?  OUR public men are in little
danger of this fatal misstep, as few of them are in the habit of
introducing Latin into their speeches,--for good and sufficient
reasons.  But they are bound to speak decent English,--unless,
indeed, they are rough old campaigners, like General Jackson or
General Taylor; in which case, a few scars on Priscian's head are
pardoned to old fellows who have quite as many on their own, and a
constituency of thirty empires is not at all particular, provided
they do not swear in their Presidential Messages.

However, it is not for me to talk.  I have made mistakes enough in
conversation and print.  I never find them out until they are
stereotyped, and then I think they rarely escape me.  I have no
doubt I shall make half a dozen slips before this breakfast is
over, and remember them all before another.  How one does tremble
with rage at his own intense momentary stupidity about things he
knows perfectly well, and to think how he lays himself open to the
impertinences of the captatores verborum, those useful but humble
scavengers of the language, whose business it is to pick up what
might offend or injure, and remove it, hugging and feeding on it as
they go!  I don't want to speak too slightingly of these verbal
critics;--how can I, who am so fond of talking about errors and
vulgarisms of speech?  Only there is a difference between those
clerical blunders which almost every man commits, knowing better,
and that habitual grossness or meanness of speech which is
unendurable to educated persons, from anybody that wears silk or
broadcloth.

[I write down the above remarks this morning, January 26th, making
this record of the date that nobody may think it was written in
wrath, on account of any particular grievance suffered from the
invasion of any individual scarabaeus grammaticus.]

--I wonder if anybody ever finds fault with anything I say at this
table when it is repeated?  I hope they do, I am sure.  I should be
very certain that I had said nothing of much significance, if they
did not.

Did you never, in walking in the fields, come across a large flat
stone, which had lain, nobody knows how long, just where you found
it, with the grass forming a little hedge, as it were, all round
it, close to its edges,--and have you not, in obedience to a kind
of feeling that told you it had been lying there long enough,
insinuated your stick or your foot or your fingers under its edge
and turned it over as a housewife turns a cake, when she says to
herself, "It's done brown enough by this time"?  What an odd
revelation, and what an unforeseen and unpleasant surprise to a
small community, the very existence of which you had not suspected,
until the sudden dismay and scattering among its members produced
by your turning the old stone over!  Blades of grass flattened
down, colorless, matted together, as if they had been bleached and
ironed; hideous crawling creatures, some of them coleopterous or
horny-shelled,--turtle-bugs one wants to call them; some of them
softer, but cunningly spread out and compressed like Lepine
watches; (Nature never loses a crack or a crevice, mind you, or a
joint in a tavern bedstead, but she always has one of her
flat-pattern five timekeepers to slide into it;) black, glossy
crickets, with their long filaments sticking out like the whips of
four-horse stage-coaches; motionless, slug-like creatures, young
larvae, perhaps more horrible in their pulpy stillness than even in
the infernal wriggle of maturity!  But no sooner is the stone turned
and the wholesome light of day let upon this compressed and blinded
community of creeping things, than all of them which enjoy the luxury
of legs--and some of them have a good many--rush round wildly,
butting each other and everything in their way, and end in a general
stampede for underground retreats from the region poisoned by
sunshine.  NEXT YEAR you will find the grass growing tall and green
where the stone lay; the ground-bird builds her nest where the beetle
had his hole; the dandelion and the buttercup are growing there, and
the broad fans of insect-angels open and shut over their golden
disks, as the rhythmic waves of blissful consciousness pulsate
through their glorified being.

--The young fellow whom they call John saw fit to say, in his very
familiar way,--at which I do not choose to take offence, but which
I sometimes think it necessary to repress,--that I was coming it
rather strong on the butterflies.

No, I replied; there is meaning in each of those images,--the
butterfly as well as the others.  The stone is ancient error.  The
grass is human nature borne down and bleached of all its colour by
it.  The shapes which are found beneath are the crafty beings that
thrive in darkness, and the weaker organisms kept helpless by it.
He who turns the stone over is whosoever puts the staff of truth to
the old lying incubus, no matter whether he do it with a serious
face or a laughing one.  The next year stands for the coming time.
Then shall the nature which had lain blanched and broken rise in
its full stature and native hues in the sunshine.  Then shall God's
minstrels build their nests in the hearts of a new-born humanity.
Then shall beauty--Divinity taking outlines and color--light upon
the souls of men as the butterfly, image of the beatified spirit
rising from the dust, soars from the shell that held a poor grub,
which would never have found wings, had not the stone been lifted.

You never need think you can turn over any old falsehood without a
terrible squirming and scattering of the horrid little population
that dwells under it.

--Every real thought on every real subject knocks the wind out of
somebody or other.  As soon as his breath comes back, he very
probably begins to expend it in hard words.  These are the best
evidence a man can have that he has said something it was time to
say.  Dr. Johnson was disappointed in the effect of one of his
pamphlets.  "I think I have not been attacked enough for it," he
said;--"attack is the reaction; I never think I have hit hard
unless it rebounds."

--If a fellow attacked my opinions in print would I reply?  Not I.
Do you think I don't understand what my friend, the Professor, long
ago called THE HYDROSTATIC PARADOX OF CONTROVERSY?

Don't know what that means?--Well, I will tell you.  You know,
that, if you had a bent tube, one arm of which was of the size of a
pipe-stem, and the other big enough to hold the ocean, water would
stand at the same height in one as in the other.  Controversy
equalizes fools and wise men in the same way,--AND THE FOOLS KNOW
IT.

--No, but I often read what they say about other people.  There are
about a dozen phrases which all come tumbling along together, like
the tongs, and the shovel, and the poker, and the brush, and the
bellows, in one of those domestic avalanches that everybody knows.
If you get one, you get the whole lot.

What are they?--Oh, that depends a good deal on latitude and
longitude.  Epithets follow the isothermal lines pretty accurately.
Grouping them in two families, one finds himself a clever, genial,
witty, wise, brilliant, sparkling, thoughtful, distinguished,
celebrated, illustrious scholar and perfect gentleman, and first
writer of the age; or a dull, foolish, wicked, pert, shallow,
ignorant, insolent, traitorous, black-hearted outcast, and disgrace
to civilization.

What do I think determines the set of phrases a man gets?--Well, I
should say a set of influences something like these:---1st.
Relationships, political, religious, social, domestic.  2d.
Oyster, in the form of suppers given to gentlemen connected with
criticism.  I believe in the school, the college, and the clergy;
but my sovereign logic, for regulating public opinion--which means
commonly the opinion of half a dozen of the critical gentry--is the
following MAJOR PROPOSITION.  Oysters au naturel.  Minor
proposition.  The same "scalloped."  Conclusion.  That--(here
insert entertainer's name) is clever, witty, wise, brilliant,--and
the rest.

--No, it isn't exactly bribery.  One man has oysters, and another
epithets.  It is an exchange of hospitalities; one gives a "spread"
on linen, and the other on paper,--that is all.  Don't you think
you and I should be apt to do just so, if we were in the critical
line?  I am sure I couldn't resist the softening influences of
hospitality.  I don't like to dine out, you know,--I dine so well
at our own table, [our landlady looked radiant,] and the company is
so pleasant [a rustling movement of satisfaction among the
boarders]; but if I did partake of a man's salt, with such
additions as that article of food requires to make it palatable, I
could never abuse him, and if I had to speak of him, I suppose I
should hang my set of jingling epithets round him like a string of
sleigh-bells.  Good feeling helps society to make liars of most of
us,--not absolute liars, but such careless handlers of truth that
its sharp corners get terribly rounded.  I love truth as chiefest
among the virtues; I trust it runs in my blood; but I would never
be a critic, because I know I could not always tell it.  I might
write a criticism of a book that happened to please me; that is
another matter.

--Listen, Benjamin Franklin!  This is for you, and such others of
tender age as you may tell it to.

When we are as yet small children, long before the time when those
two grown ladies offer us the choice of Hercules, there comes up to
us a youthful angel, holding in his right hand cubes like dice, and
in his left spheres like marbles.  The cubes are of stainless
ivory, and on each is written in letters of gold--TRUTH.  The
spheres are veined and streaked and spotted beneath, with a dark
crimson flush above, where the light falls on them, and in a
certain aspect you can make out upon every one of them the three
letters L, I, E.  The child to whom they are offered very probably
clutches at both.  The spheres are the most convenient things in
the world; they roll with the least possible impulse just where the
child would have them.  The cubes will not roll at all; they have a
great talent for standing still, and always keep right side up.
But very soon the young philosopher finds that things which roll so
easily are very apt to roll into the wrong corner, and to get out
of his way when he most wants them, while he always knows where to
find the others, which stay where they are left.  Thus he learns
--thus we learn--to drop the streaked and speckled globes of
falsehood and to hold fast the white angular blocks of truth.  But
then comes Timidity, and after her Good-nature, and last of all
Polite-behavior, all insisting that truth must ROLL, or nobody can
do anything with it; and so the first with her coarse rasp, and the
second with her broad file, and the third with her silken sleeve,
do so round off and smooth and polish the snow-white cubes of
truth, that, when they have got a little dingy by use, it becomes
hard to tell them from the rolling spheres of falsehood.

The schoolmistress was polite enough to say that she was pleased
with this, and that she would read it to her little flock the next
day.  But she should tell the children, she said, that there were
better reasons for truth than could be found in mere experience of
its convenience and the inconvenience of lying.

Yes,--I said,--but education always begins through the senses, and
works up to the idea of absolute right and wrong.  The first thing
the child has to learn about this matter is, that lying is
unprofitable,--afterwards, that it is against the peace and dignity
of the universe.

--Do I think that the particular form of lying often seen in
newspapers, under the title, "From our Foreign Correspondent," does
any harm?--Why, no,--I don't know that it does.  I suppose it
doesn't really deceive people any more than the "Arabian Nights" or
"Gulliver's Travels" do.  Sometimes the writers compile TOO
carelessly, though, and mix up facts out of geographies, and
stories out of the penny papers, so as to mislead those who are
desirous of information.  I cut a piece out of one of the papers,
the other day, which contains a number of improbabilities, and, I
suspect, misstatements.  I will send up and get it for you, if you
would like to hear it.--Ah, this is it; it is headed


"OUR SUMATRA CORRESPONDENCE.

"This island is now the property of the Stamford family,--having
been won, it is said, in a raffle, by Sir--Stamford, during the
stock-gambling mania of the South-Sea Scheme.  The history of this
gentleman may be found in an interesting series of questions
(unfortunately not yet answered) contained in the 'Notes and
Queries.'  This island is entirely surrounded by the ocean, which
here contains a large amount of saline substance, crystallizing in
cubes remarkable for their symmetry, and frequently displays on its
surface, during calm weather, the rainbow tints of the celebrated
South-Sea bubbles.  The summers are oppressively hot, and the
winters very probably cold; but this fact cannot be ascertained
precisely, as, for some peculiar reason, the mercury in these
latitudes never shrinks, as in more northern regions, and thus the
thermometer is rendered useless in winter.

"The principal vegetable productions of the island are the pepper
tree and the bread-fruit tree.  Pepper being very abundantly
produced, a benevolent society was organized in London during the
last century for supplying the natives with vinegar and oysters, as
an addition to that delightful condiment.  [Note received from Dr.
D. P.]  It is said, however, that, as the oysters were of the kind
called NATIVES in England, the natives of Sumatra, in obedience to
a natural instinct, refused to touch them, and confined themselves
entirely to the crew of the vessel in which they were brought over.
This information was received from one of the oldest inhabitants, a
native himself, and exceedingly fond of missionaries.  He is said
also to be very skilful in the CUISINE peculiar to the island.

"During the season of gathering the pepper, the persons employed
are subject to various incommodities, the chief of which is violent
and long-continued sternutation, or sneezing.  Such is the
vehemence of these attacks, that the unfortunate subjects of them
are often driven backwards for great distances at immense speed, on
the well-known principle of the aeolipile.  Not being able to see
where they are going, these poor creatures dash themselves to
pieces against the rocks or are precipitated over the cliffs and
thus many valuable lives are lost annually.  As, during the whole
pepper-harvest, they feed exclusively on this stimulant, they
become exceedingly irritable.  The smallest injury is resented with
ungovernable rage.  A young man suffering from the PEPPER-FEVER as
it is called, cudgelled another most severely for appropriating a
superannuated relative of trifling value, and was only pacified by
having a present made him of a pig of that peculiar species of
swine called the Peccavi by the Catholic Jews, who, it is well
known, abstain from swine's flesh in imitation of the Mahometan
Buddhists.

"The bread-tree grows abundantly.  Its branches are well known to
Europe and America under the familiar name of maccaroni.  The
smaller twigs are called vermicelli.  They have a decided animal
flavor, as may be observed in the soups containing them.
Maccaroni, being tubular, is the favorite habitat of a very
dangerous insect, which is rendered peculiarly ferocious by being
boiled.  The government of the island, therefore, never allows a
stick of it to be exported without being accompanied by a piston
with which its cavity may at any time be thoroughly swept out.
These are commonly lost or stolen before the maccaroni arrives
among us.  It therefore always contains many of these insects,
which, however, generally die of old age in the shops, so that
accidents from this source are comparatively rare.

"The fruit of the bread-tree consists principally of hot rolls.
The buttered-muffin variety is supposed to be a hybrid with the
cocoa-nut palm, the cream found on the milk of the cocoa-nut
exuding from the hybrid in the shape of butter, just as the ripe
fruit is splitting, so as to fit it for the tea-table, where it is
commonly served up with cold"--

--There,--I don't want to read any more of it.  You see that many
of these statements are highly improbable.--No, I shall not mention
the paper.--No, neither of them wrote it, though it reminds me of
the style of these popular writers.  I think the fellow who wrote
it must have been reading some of their stories, and got them mixed
up with his history and geography.  I don't suppose HE lies;--he
sells it to the editor, who knows how many squares off "Sumatra"
is.  The editor, who sells it to the public--By the way, the papers
have been very civil haven't they?--to the--the what d'ye call it?
--"Northern Magazine,"--isn't it?--got up by some of those
Come-outers, down East, as an organ for their local peculiarities.

--The Professor has been to see me.  Came in, glorious, at about
twelve o'clock, last night.  Said he had been with "the boys."  On
inquiry, found that "the boys," were certain baldish and grayish
old gentlemen that one sees or hears of in various important
stations of society.  The Professor is one of the same set, but he
always talks as if he had been out of college about ten years,
whereas. . .  [Each of these dots was a little nod, which the
company understood, as the reader will, no doubt.]  He calls them
sometimes "the boys," and sometimes "the old fellows."  Call him by
the latter title, and see how he likes it.--Well, he came in last
night glorious, as I was saying.  Of course I don't mean vinously
exalted; he drinks little wine on such occasions, and is well known
to all the Peters and Patricks as the gentleman who always has
indefinite quantities of black tea to kill any extra glass of red
claret he may have swallowed.  But the Professor says he always
gets tipsy on old memories at these gatherings.  He was, I forget
how many years old when he went to the meeting; just turned of
twenty now,--he said.  He made various youthful proposals to me,
including a duet under the landlady's daughter's window.  He had
just learned a trick, he said, of one of "the boys," of getting a
splendid bass out of a door-panel by rubbing it with the palm of
his hand.  Offered to sing "The sky is bright," accompanying
himself on the front-door, if I would go down and help in the
chorus.  Said there never was such a set of fellows as the old boys
of the set he has been with.  Judges, mayors, Congress-men, Mr.
Speakers, leaders in science, clergymen better than famous, and
famous too, poets by the half-dozen, singers with voices like
angels, financiers, wits, three of the best laughers in the
Commonwealth, engineers, agriculturists,--all forms of talent and
knowledge he pretended were represented in that meeting.  Then he
began to quote Byron about Santa Croce, and maintained that he
could "furnish out creation" in all its details from that set of
his.  He would like to have the whole boodle of them, (I
remonstrated against this word, but the Professor said it was a
diabolish good word, and he would have no other,) with their wives
and children, shipwrecked on a remote island, just to see how
splendidly they would reorganize society.  They could build a
city,--they have done it; make constitutions and laws; establish
churches and lyceums; teach and practise the healing art; instruct
in every department; found observatories; create commerce and
manufactures; write songs and hymns, and sing 'em, and make
instruments to accompany the songs with; lastly, publish a
journal almost as good as the "Northern Magazine," edited by the
Come-outers.  There was nothing they were not up to, from a
christening to a hanging; the last, to be sure, could never be called
for, unless some stranger got in among them.

--I let the Professor talk as long as he liked; it didn't make much
difference to me whether it was all truth, or partly made up of
pale Sherry and similar elements.  All at once he jumped up and
said,--

Don't you want to hear what I just read to the boys?

I have had questions of a similar character asked me before,
occasionally.  A man of iron mould might perhaps say, No!  I am not
a man of iron mould, and said that I should be delighted.

The Professor then read--with that slightly sing-song cadence which
is observed to be common in poets reading their own verses--the
following stanzas; holding them at a focal distance of about two
feet and a half, with an occasional movement back or forward for
better adjustment, the appearance of which has been likened by some
impertinent young folks to that of the act of playing on the
trombone.  His eyesight was never better; I have his word for it.


MARE RUBRUM.


Flash out a stream of blood-red wine!--
For I would drink to other days;
And brighter shall their memory shine,
Seen flaming through its crimson blaze.
The roses die, the summers fade;
But every ghost of boyhood's dream
By Nature's magic power is laid
To sleep beneath this blood-red stream.

It filled the purple grapes that lay
And drank the splendors of the sun
Where the long summer's cloudless day
Is mirrored in the broad Garonne;
It pictures still the bacchant shapes
That saw their hoarded sunlight shed,--
The maidens dancing on the grapes,--
Their milk-white ankles splashed with red.

Beneath these waves of crimson lie,
In rosy fetters prisoned fast,
Those flitting shapes that never die,
The swift-winged visions of the past.
Kiss but the crystal's mystic rim,
Each shadow rends its flowery chain,
Springs in a bubble from its brim
And walks the chambers of the brain.

Poor Beauty! time and fortune's wrong
No form nor feature may withstand,--
Thy wrecks are scattered all along,
Like emptied sea-shells on the sand;--
Yet, sprinkled with this blushing rain,
The dust restores each blooming girl,
As if the sea-shells moved again
Their glistening lips of pink and pearl.

Here lies the home of school-boy life,
With creaking stair and wind-swept hall,
And, scarred by many a truant knife,
Our old initials on the wall;
Here rest--their keen vibrations mute--
The shout of voices known so well,
The ringing laugh, the wailing flute,
The chiding of the sharp-tongued bell.

Here, clad in burning robes, are laid
Life's blossomed joys, untimely shed;
And here those cherished forms have strayed
We miss awhile, and call them dead.
What wizard fills the maddening glass
What soil the enchanted clusters grew?
That buried passions wake and pass
In beaded drops of fiery dew?

Nay, take the cup of blood-red wine,--
Our hearts can boast a warmer grow,
Filled from a vantage more divine,--
Calmed, but not chilled by winter's snow!
To-night the palest wave we sip
Rich as the priceless draught shall be
That wet the bride of Cana's lip,--
The wedding wine of Galilee!



CHAPTER VI



Sin has many tools, but a lie is the handle which fits them all.

--I think, Sir,--said the divinity-student,--you must intend that
for one of the sayings of the Seven Wise Men of Boston you were
speaking of the other day.

I thank you, my young friend,--was my reply,--but I must say
something better than that, before I could pretend to fill out the
number.

--The schoolmistress wanted to know how many of these sayings there
were on record, and what, and by whom said.

--Why, let us see,--there is that one of Benjamin Franklin, "the
great Bostonian," after whom this lad was named.  To be sure, he
said a great many wise things,--and I don't feel sure he didn't
borrow this,--he speaks as if it were old.  But then he applied it
so neatly!--

"He that has once done you a kindness will be more ready to do you
another than he whom you yourself have obliged."

Then there is that glorious Epicurean paradox, uttered by my
friend, the Historian, in one of his flashing moments:-

"Give us the luxuries of life, and we will dispense with its
necessaries."

To these must certainly be added that other saying of one of the
wittiest of men:-

"Good Americans, when they die, go to Paris."--

The divinity-student looked grave at this, but said nothing.

The schoolmistress spoke out, and said she didn't think the wit
meant any irreverence.  It was only another way of saying, Paris is
a heavenly place after New York or Boston.

A jaunty-looking person, who had come in with the young fellow they
call John,--evidently a stranger,--said there was one more wise
man's saying that he had heard; it was about our place, but he
didn't know who said it.--A civil curiosity was manifested by the
company to hear the fourth wise saying.  I heard him distinctly
whispering to the young fellow who brought him to dinner, SHALL I
TELL IT?  To which the answer was, GO AHEAD!--Well,--he said,--this
was what I heard:-

"Boston State-House is the hub of the solar system.  You couldn't
pry that out of a Boston man if you had the tire of all creation
straightened out for a crowbar."

Sir,--said I,--I am gratified with your remark.  It expresses with
pleasing vivacity that which I have sometimes heard uttered with
malignant dulness.  The satire of the remark is essentially true of
Boston,--and of all other considerable--and inconsiderable--places
with which I have had the privilege of being acquainted.  Cockneys
think London is the only place in the world.  Frenchmen--you
remember the line about Paris, the Court, the World, etc.---I
recollect well, by the way, a sign in that city which ran thus:
"Hotel l'Univers et des Etats Unis"; and as Paris IS the universe
to a Frenchman, of course the United States are outside of it.
--"See Naples and then die."--It is quite as bad with smaller places.
I have been about, lecturing, you know, and have found the
following propositions to hold true of all of them.

1.  The axis of the earth sticks out visibly through the centre of
each and every town or city.

2.  If more than fifty years have passed since its foundation, it
is affectionately styled by the inhabitants the "GOOD OLD town of"
--(whatever its name may happen to be.)

3.  Every collection of its inhabitants that comes together to
listen to a stranger is invariably declared to be a "remarkably
intelligent audience."

4.  The climate of the place is particularly favorable to
longevity.

5.  It contains several persons of vast talent little known to the
world.  (One or two of them, you may perhaps chance to remember,
sent short pieces to the "Pactolian" some time since, which were
"respectfully declined.")

Boston is just like other places of its size;--only perhaps,
considering its excellent fish-market, paid fire-department,
superior monthly publications, and correct habit of spelling the
English language, it has some right to look down on the mob of
cities.  I'll tell you, though, if you want to know it, what is the
real offence of Boston.  It drains a large water-shed of its
intellect, and will not itself be drained.  If it would only send
away its first-rate men, instead of its second-rate ones, (no
offence to the well-known exceptions, of which we are always
proud,) we should be spared such epigrammatic remarks as that which
the gentleman has quoted.  There can never be a real metropolis in
this country, until the biggest centre can drain the lesser ones of
their talent and wealth.--I have observed, by the way, that the
people who really live in two great cities are by no means so
jealous of each other, as are those of smaller cities situated
within the intellectual basin, or suction-range, of one large one,
of the pretensions of any other.  Don't you see why?  Because their
promising young author and rising lawyer and large capitalist have
been drained off to the neighboring big city,--their prettiest girl
has been exported to the same market; all their ambition points
there, and all their thin gilding of glory comes from there.  I
hate little toad-eating cities.

--Would I be so good as to specify any particular example?--Oh,--an
example?  Did you ever see a bear-trap?  Never?  Well, shouldn't
you like to see me put my foot into one?  With sentiments of the
highest consideration I must beg leave to be excused.

Besides, some of the smaller cities are charming.  If they have an
old church or two, a few stately mansions of former grandees, here
and there an old dwelling with the second story projecting, (for
the convenience of shooting the Indians knocking at the front-door
with their tomahawks,)--if they have, scattered about, those mighty
square houses built something more than half a century ago, and
standing like architectural boulders dropped by the former diluvium
of wealth, whose refluent wave has left them as its monument,--if
they have gardens with elbowed apple-trees that push their branches
over the high board-fence and drop their fruit on the side-walk,
--if they have a little grass in the side-streets, enough to betoken
quiet without proclaiming decay,--I think I could go to pieces,
after my life's work were done, in one of those tranquil places, as
sweetly as in any cradle that an old man may be rocked to sleep in.
I visit such spots always with infinite delight.  My friend, the
Poet, says, that rapidly growing towns are most unfavorable to the
imaginative and reflective faculties.  Let a man live in one of
these old quiet places, he says, and the wine of his soul, which is
kept thick and turbid by the rattle of busy streets, settles, and,
as you hold it up, you may see the sun through it by day and the
stars by night.

--Do I think that the little villages have the conceit of the great
towns?--I don't believe there is much difference.  You know how
they read Pope's line in the smallest town in our State of
Massachusetts?--Well, they read it


"All are but parts of one stupendous HULL!"


--Every person's feelings have a front-door and a side-door by
which they may be entered.  The front-door is on the street.  Some
keep it always open; some keep it latched; some, locked; some,
bolted,--with a chain that will let you peep in, but not get in;
and some nail it up, so that nothing can pass its threshold.  This
front-door leads into a passage which opens into an ante-room, and
this into the inferior apartments.  The side-door opens at once
into the sacred chambers.

There is almost always at least one key to this side-door.  This is
carried for years hidden in a mother's bosom.  Fathers, brothers,
sisters, and friends, often, but by no means so universally, have
duplicates of it.  The wedding-ring conveys a right to one; alas,
if none is given with it!

If nature or accident has put one of these keys into the hands of a
person who has the torturing instinct, I can only solemnly
pronounce the words that Justice utters over its doomed victim,
--THE LORD HAVE MERCY ON YOUR SOUL!  You will probably go mad within
a reasonable time,--or, if you are a man, run off and die with your
head on a curb-stone, in Melbourne or San Francisco,--or, if you
are a woman, quarrel and break your heart, or turn into a pale,
jointed petrifaction that moves about as if it were alive, or play
some real life-tragedy or other.

Be very careful to whom you trust one of these keys of the
side-door.  The fact of possessing one renders those even who are
dear to you very terrible at times.  You can keep the world out from
your front-door, or receive visitors only when you are ready for
them; but those of your own flesh and blood, or of certain grades of
intimacy, can come in at the side-door, if they will, at any hour and
in any mood.  Some of them have a scale of your whole nervous system,
and can play all the gamut of your sensibilities in semitones,
--touching the naked nerve-pulps as a pianist strikes the keys of his
instrument.  I am satisfied that there are as great masters of this
nerve-playing as Vieuxtemps or Thalberg in their lines of
performance.  Married life is the school in which the most
accomplished artists in this department are found.  A delicate woman
is the best instrument; she has such a magnificent compass of
sensibilities!  From the deep inward moan which follows pressure on
the great nerves of right, to the sharp cry as the filaments of taste
are struck with a crashing sweep, is a range which no other
instrument possesses.  A few exercises on it daily at home fit a man
wonderfully for his habitual labors, and refresh him immensely as he
returns from them.  No stranger can get a great many notes of torture
out of a human soul; it takes one that knows it well,--parent,
child, brother, sister, intimate.  Be very careful to whom you give a
side-door key; too many have them already.

--You remember the old story of the tender-hearted man, who placed
a frozen viper in his bosom, and was stung by it when it became
thawed?  If we take a cold-blooded creature into our bosom, better
that it should sting us and we should die than that its chill
should slowly steal into our hearts; warm it we never can!  I have
seen faces of women that were fair to look upon, yet one could see
that the icicles were forming round these women's hearts.  I knew
what freezing image lay on the white breasts beneath the laces!

A very simple INTELLECTUAL mechanism answers the necessities of
friendship, and even of the most intimate relations of life.  If a
watch tells us the hour and the minute, we can be content to carry
it about with us for a life-time, though it has no second-hand and
is not a repeater, nor a musical watch,--though it is not enamelled
nor jewelled,--in short, though it has little beyond the wheels
required for a trustworthy instrument, added to a good face and a
pair of useful hands.  The more wheels there are in a watch or a
brain, the more trouble they are to take care of.  The movements of
exaltation which belong to genius are egotistic by their very
nature.  A calm, clear mind, not subject to the spasms and crises
which are so often met with in creative or intensely perceptive
natures, is the best basis for love or friendship.--Observe, I am
talking about MINDS.  I won't say, the more intellect, the less
capacity for loving; for that would do wrong to the understanding
and reason;--but, on the other hand, that the brain often runs away
with the heart's best blood, which gives the world a few pages of
wisdom or sentiment or poetry, instead of making one other heart
happy, I have no question.

If one's intimate in love or friendship cannot or does not share
all one's intellectual tastes or pursuits, that is a small matter.
Intellectual companions can be found easily in men and books.
After all, if we think of it, most of the world's loves and
friendships have been between people that could not read nor spell.

But to radiate the heat of the affections into a clod which absorbs
all that is poured into it, but never warms beneath the sunshine of
smiles or the pressure of hand or lip,--this is the great martyrdom
of sensitive beings,--most of all in that perpetual auto da fe
where young womanhood is the sacrifice.

--You noticed, perhaps, what I just said about the loves and
friendships of illiterate persons,--that is, of the human race,
with a few exceptions here and there.  I like books,--I was born
and bred among them, and have the easy feeling, when I get into
their presence, that a stable-boy has among horses.  I don't think
I undervalue them either as companions or as instructors.  But I
can't help remembering that the world's great men have not commonly
been great scholars, nor its great scholars great men.  The Hebrew
patriarchs had small libraries, I think, if any; yet they represent
to our imaginations a very complete idea of manhood, and, I think,
if we could ask in Abraham to dine with us men of letters next
Saturday, we should feel honored by his company.

What I wanted to say about books is this:  that there are times in
which every active mind feels itself above any and all human books.

--I think a man must have a good opinion of himself, Sir,--said the
divinity-student,--who should feel himself above Shakspeare at any
time.

My young friend,--I replied,--the man who is never conscious of a
state of feeling or of intellectual effort entirely beyond
expression by any form of words whatsoever is a mere creature of
language.  I can hardly believe there are any such men.  Why, think
for a moment of the power of music.  The nerves that make us alive
to it spread out (so the Professor tells me) in the most sensitive
region of the marrow just where it is widening to run upwards into
the hemispheres.  It has its seat in the region of sense rather
than of thought.  Yet it produces a continuous and, as it were,
logical sequence of emotional and intellectual changes; but how
different from trains of thought proper! how entirely beyond the
reach of symbols!--Think of human passions as compared with all
phrases!  Did you ever hear of a man's growing lean by the reading
of "Romeo and Juliet," or blowing his brains out because Desdemona
was maligned?  There are a good many symbols, even, that are more
expressive than words.  I remember a young wife who had to part
with her husband for a time.  She did not write a mournful poem;
indeed, she was a silent person, and perhaps hardly said a word
about it; but she quietly turned of a deep orange color with
jaundice.  A great many people in this world have but one form of
rhetoric for their profoundest experiences,--namely, to waste away
and die.  When a man can READ, his paroxysm of feeling is passing.
When he can READ, his thought has slackened its hold.--You talk
about reading Shakspeare, using him as an expression for the
highest intellect, and you wonder that any common person should be
so presumptuous as to suppose his thought can rise above the text
which lies before him.  But think a moment.  A child's reading of
Shakspeare is one thing, and Coleridge's or Schlegel's reading of
him is another.  The saturation-point of each mind differs from
that of every other.  But I think it is as true for the small mind
which can only take up a little as for the great one which takes up
much, that the suggested trains of thought and feeling ought always
to rise above--not the author, but the reader's mental version of
the author, whoever he may be.

I think most readers of Shakspeare sometimes find themselves thrown
into exalted mental conditions like those produced by music.  Then
they may drop the book, to pass at once into the region of thought
without words.  We may happen to be very dull folks, you and I, and
probably are, unless there is some particular reason to suppose the
contrary.  But we get glimpses now and then of a sphere of
spiritual possibilities, where we, dull as we are now, may sail in
vast circles round the largest compass of earthly intelligences.

--I confess there are times when I feel like the friend I mentioned
to you some time ago,--I hate the very sight of a book.  Sometimes
it becomes almost a physical necessity to talk out what is in the
mind, before putting anything else into it.  It is very bad to have
thoughts and feelings, which were meant to come out in talk, STRIKE
IN, as they say of some complaints that ought to show outwardly.

I always believed in life rather than in books.  I suppose every
day of earth, with its hundred thousand deaths and something more
of births,--with its loves and hates, its triumphs and defeats, its
pangs and blisses, has more of humanity in it than all the books
that were ever written, put together.  I believe the flowers
growing at this moment send up more fragrance to heaven than was
ever exhaled from all the essences ever distilled.

--Don't I read up various matters to talk about at this table or
elsewhere?--No, that is the last thing I would do.  I will tell you
my rule.  Talk about those subjects you have had long in your mind,
and listen to what others say about subjects you have studied but
recently.  Knowledge and timber shouldn't be much used, till they
are seasoned.

--Physiologists and metaphysicians have had their attention turned
a good deal of late to the automatic and involuntary actions of the
mind.  Put an idea into your intelligence and leave it there an
hour, a day, a year, without ever having occasion to refer to it.
When, at last, you return to it, you do not find it as it was when
acquired.  It has domiciliated itself, so to speak,--become at
home,--entered into relations with your other thoughts, and
integrated itself with the whole fabric of the mind.--Or take a
simple and familiar example; Dr. Carpenter has adduced it.  You
forget a name, in conversation,--go on talking, without making any
effort to recall it,--and presently the mind evolves it by its own
involuntary and unconscious action, while you were pursuing another
train of thought, and the name rises of itself to your lips.

There are some curious observations I should like to make about the
mental machinery, but I think we are getting rather didactic.

--I should be gratified, if Benjamin Franklin would let me know
something of his progress in the French language.  I rather liked
that exercise he read us the other day, though I must confess I
should hardly dare to translate it, for fear some people in a
remote city where I once lived might think I was drawing their
portraits.

--Yes, Paris is a famous place for societies.  I don't know whether
the piece I mentioned from the French author was intended simply as
Natural History, or whether there was not a little malice in his
description.  At any rate, when I gave my translation to B. F. to
turn back again into French, one reason was that I thought it would
sound a little bald in English, and some people might think it was
meant to have some local bearing or other,--which the author, of
course, didn't mean, inasmuch as he could not be acquainted with
anything on this side of the water.

 [The above remarks were addressed to the school-mistress, to whom
I handed the paper after looking it over.  The divinity-student
came and read over her shoulder,--very curious, apparently, but his
eyes wandered, I thought.  Fancying that her breathing was somewhat
hurried and high, or thoracic, as my friend, the Professor, calls
it, I watched her a little more closely.--It is none of my
business.--After all, it is the imponderables that move the world,
--heat, electricity, love.  Habet?]

This is the piece that Benjamin Franklin made into boarding-school
French, such as you see here; don't expect too much;--the mistakes
give a relish to it, I think.


LES SOCIETES POLYPHYSIOPHILOSOPHIQUES.

Ces Societes la sont une Institution pour suppleer aux besoins
d'esprit et de coeur de ces individus qui ont survecu a leurs
emotions a l'egard du beau sexe, et qui n'ont pas la distraction de
l'habitude de boire.

Pour devenir membre d'une de ces Societes, on doit avoir le moins
de cheveux possible.  S'il y en reste plusieurs qui resistent aux
depilatoires naturelles et autres, on doit avoir quelques
connaissances, n'importe dans quel genre.  Des le moment qu'on
ouvre la porte de la Societe, on a un grand interet dans toutes les
choses dont on ne sait rien.  Ainsi, un microscopiste demontre un
nouveau FLEXOR du TARSE d'un MELOLONTHA VULGARIS.  Douze savans
improvises, portans des besicles, et qui ne connaissent rien des
insectes, si ce n'est les morsures du CULEX, se precipitent sur
l'instrument, et voient--une grande bulle d'air, dont ils
s'emerveillent avec effusion.  Ce qui est un spectacle plein
d'instruction--pour ceux qui ne sont pas de ladite Societe.  Tous
les membres regardent les chimistes en particulier avec un air
d'intelligence parfaite pendant qu'ils prouvent dans un discours
d'une demiheure que O6 N3 H5 C6 etc. font quelque chose qui n'est
bonne a rien, mais qui probablement a une odeur tres desagreable,
selon l'habitude des produits chimiques.  Apres cela vient un
mathematicien qui vous bourre avec des a+b et vous rapporte enfin
un x+y, dont vous n'avex pas besoin et qui ne change nullement vos
relations avec la vie.  Un naturaliste vous parle des formations
speciales des animaux excessivement inconnus, dont vous n'avez
jamais soupconne l'existence.  Ainsi il vous decrit les FOLLICULES
de L'APPENDIX VERMIFORMIS d'un DZIGGUETAI.  Vous ne savez pas ce
que c'est qu'un FOLLICULE.  Vous ne savez pas ce que c'est qu'un
APPENDIX UERMIFORMIS.  Vous n'avez jamais entendu parler du
DZIGGUETAI.  Ainsi vous gagnez toutes ces connaisances a la fois,
qui s'attachent a votre esprit comme l'eau adhere aux plumes d'un
canard.  On connait toutes les langues EX OFFICIO en devenant
membre d'une de ces Societes.  Ainsi quand on entend lire un Essai
sur les dialectes Tchutchiens, on comprend tout cela de suite, et
s'instruit enormement.

Il y a deux especes d'individus qu'on trouve toujours a ces
Societes:  1 (degree) Le membre a questions; 2 (degree) Le membre a
"Bylaws."

La QUESTION est une specialite.  Celui qui en fait metier ne fait
jamais des reponses.  La question est une maniere tres commode de
dire les choses suivantes:  "Me voila!  Je ne suis pas fossil,
moi,--je respire encore!  J'ai des idees,--voyez mon intelligence!
Vous ne croyiez pas, vous autres, que je savais quelque chose de
cela!  Ah, nous avons un peu de sagacite, voyez vous!  Nous ne
sommes nullement la bete qu'on pense!"--LE FAISEUR DE QUESTIONS
DONNE PEU D'ATTENTION AUX REPONSES QU'ON FAIT; CE N'EST PAS LA DANS
SA SPECIALITE.

Le membre a "Bylaws" est le bouchon de toutes les emotions
mousseuses et genereuses qui se montrent dans la Societe.  C'est un
empereur manque,--un tyran a la troiseme trituration.  C'est un
esprit dur, borne, exact, grand dans les petitesses, petit dans les
grandeurs, selon le mot du grand Jefferson.  On ne l'aime pas dans
la Societe, mais on le respecte et on le craint.  Il n'y a qu'un
mot pour ce membre audessus de "Bylaws."  Ce mot est pour lui ce
que l'Om est aux Hundous.  C'est sa religion; il n'y a rien audela.
Ce mot la c'est la CONSTITUTION!

Lesdites Societes publient des feuilletons de tems en tems.  On les
trouve abandonnes a sa porte, nus comme des enfans nouveaunes,
faute de membrane cutanee, ou meme papyracee.  Si on aime la
botanique, on y trouve une memoire sur les coquilles; si on fait
des etudes zoologiques, on square trouve un grand tas de q' [square
root of minus one], ce qui doit etre infiniment plus commode que
les encyclopedies.  Ainsi il est clair comme la metaphysique qu'on
doit devenir membre d'une Societe telle que nous decrivons.

Recette pour le Depilatoire Physiophilosophique
Chaux vive lb. ss.  Eau bouillante Oj.
Depilez avec.  Polissez ensuite.


I told the boy that his translation into French was creditable to
him; and some of the company wishing to hear what there was in the
piece that made me smile, I turned it into English for them, as
well as I could, on the spot.

The landlady's daughter seemed to be much amused by the idea that a
depilatory could take the place of literary and scientific
accomplishments; she wanted me to print the piece, so that she
might send a copy of it to her cousin in Mizzourah; she didn't
think he'd have to do anything to the outside of his head to get
into any of the societies; he had to wear a wig once, when he
played a part in a tabullo.

No,--said I,--I shouldn't think of printing that in English.  I'll
tell you why.  As soon as you get a few thousand people together in
a town, there is somebody that every sharp thing you say is sure to
hit.  What if a thing was written in Paris or in Pekin?--that makes
no difference.  Everybody in those cities, or almost everybody, has
his counterpart here, and in all large places.--You never studied
AVERAGES as I have had occasion to.

I'll tell you how I came to know so much about averages.  There was
one season when I was lecturing, commonly, five evenings in the
week, through most of the lecturing period.  I soon found, as most
speakers do, that it was pleasanter to work one lecture than to
keep several in hand.

--Don't you get sick to death of one lecture?--said the landlady's
daughter,--who had a new dress on that day, and was in spirits for
conversation.

I was going to talk about averages,--I said,--but I have no
objection to telling you about lectures, to begin with.

A new lecture always has a certain excitement connected with its
delivery.  One thinks well of it, as of most things fresh from his
mind.  After a few deliveries of it, one gets tired and then
disgusted with its repetition.  Go on delivering it, and the
disgust passes off, until, after one has repeated it a hundred or a
hundred and fifty times, he rather enjoys the hundred and first or
hundred and fifty-first time, before a new audience.  But this is
on one condition,--that he never lays the lecture down and lets it
cool.  If he does, there comes on a loathing for it which is
intense, so that the sight of the old battered manuscript is as bad
as sea-sickness.

A new lecture is just like any other new tool.  We use it for a
while with pleasure.  Then it blisters our hands, and we hate to
touch it.  By-and-by our hands get callous, and then we have no
longer any sensitiveness about it.  But if we give it up, the
calluses disappear; and if we meddle with it again, we miss the
novelty and get the blisters.--The story is often quoted of
Whitefield, that he said a sermon was good for nothing until it had
been preached forty times.  A lecture doesn't begin to be old until
it has passed its hundredth delivery; and some, I think, have
doubled, if not quadrupled, that number.  These old lectures are a
man's best, commonly; they improve by age, also,--like the pipes,
fiddles, and poems I told you of the other day.  One learns to make
the most of their strong points and to carry off their weak ones,
--to take out the really good things which don't tell on the
audience, and put in cheaper things that do.  All this degrades
him, of course, but it improves the lecture for general delivery.
A thoroughly popular lecture ought to have nothing in it which five
hundred people cannot all take in a flash, just as it is uttered.

--No, indeed,--I should be very sorry to say anything disrespectful
of audiences.  I have been kindly treated by a great many, and may
occasionally face one hereafter.  But I tell you the AVERAGE
intellect of five hundred persons, taken as they come, is not very
high.  It may be sound and safe, so far as it goes, but it is not
very rapid or profound.  A lecture ought to be something which all
can understand, about something which interests everybody.  I
think, that, if any experienced lecturer gives you a different
account from this, it will probably be one of those eloquent or
forcible speakers who hold an audience by the charm of their
manner, whatever they talk about,--even when they don't talk very
well.

But an AVERAGE, which was what I meant to speak about, is one of
the most extraordinary subjects of observation and study.  It is
awful in its uniformity, in its automatic necessity of action.  Two
communities of ants or bees are exactly alike in all their actions,
so far as we can see.  Two lyceum assemblies, of five hundred each,
are so nearly alike, that they are absolutely undistinguishable in
many cases by any definite mark, and there is nothing but the place
and time by which one can tell the "remarkably intelligent
audience" of a town in New York or Ohio from one in any New England
town of similar size.  Of course, if any principle of selection has
come in, as in those special associations of young men which are
common in cities, it deranges the uniformity of the assemblage.
But let there be no such interfering circumstances, and one knows
pretty well even the look the audience will have, before he goes
in.  Front seats:  a few old folk,--shiny-headed,--slant up best
ear towards the speaker,--drop off asleep after a while, when the
air begins to get a little narcotic with carbonic acid.  Bright
women's faces, young and middle-aged, a little behind these, but
toward the front--(pick out the best, and lecture mainly to that.)
Here and there a countenance, sharp and scholarlike, and a dozen
pretty female ones sprinkled about.  An indefinite number of pairs
of young people,--happy, but not always very attentive.  Boys, in
the background, more or less quiet.  Dull faces here, there,--in
how many places!  I don't say dull PEOPLE, but faces without a ray
of sympathy or a movement of expression.  They are what kill the
lecturer.  These negative faces with their vacuous eyes and stony
lineaments pump and suck the warm soul out of him;--that is the
chief reason why lecturers grow so pale before the season is over.
They render LATENT any amount of vital caloric; they act on our
minds as those cold-blooded creatures I was talking about act on
our hearts.

Out of all these inevitable elements the audience is generated,--a
great compound vertebrate, as much like fifty others you have seen
as any two mammals of the same species are like each other.  Each
audience laughs, and each cries, in just the same places of your
lecture; that is, if you make one laugh or cry, you make all.  Even
those little indescribable movements which a lecturer takes
cognizance of, just as a driver notices his horse's cocking his
ears, are sure to come in exactly the same place of your lecture
always.  I declare to you, that as the monk said about the picture
in the convent,--that he sometimes thought the living tenants were
the shadows, and the painted figures the realities,--I have
sometimes felt as if I were a wandering spirit, and this great
unchanging multivertebrate which I faced night after night was one
ever-listening animal, which writhed along after me wherever I
fled, and coiled at my feet every evening, turning up to me the
same sleepless eyes which I thought I had closed with my last
drowsy incantation!

--Oh, yes!  A thousand kindly and courteous acts,--a thousand faces
that melted individually out of my recollection as the April snow
melts, but only to steal away and find the beds of flowers whose
roots are memory, but which blossom in poetry and dreams.  I am not
ungrateful, nor unconscious of all the good feeling and
intelligence everywhere to be met with through the vast parish to
which the lecturer ministers.  But when I set forth, leading a
string of my mind's daughters to market, as the country-folk fetch
in their strings of horses--Pardon me, that was a coarse fellow who
sneered at the sympathy wasted on an unhappy lecturer, as if,
because he was decently paid for his services, he had therefore
sold his sensibilities.--Family men get dreadfully homesick.  In
the remote and bleak village the heart returns to the red blaze of
the logs in one's fireplace at home.


"There are his young barbarians all at play,"--


if he owns any youthful savages.--No, the world has a million
roosts for a man, but only one nest.

--It is a fine thing to be an oracle to which an appeal is always
made in all discussions.  The men of facts wait their turn in grim
silence, with that slight tension about the nostrils which the
consciousness of carrying a "settler" in the form of a fact or a
revolver gives the individual thus armed.  When a person is really
full of information, and does not abuse it to crush conversation,
his part is to that of the real talkers what the instrumental
accompaniment is in a trio or quartette of vocalists.

--What do I mean by the real talkers?--Why, the people with fresh
ideas, of course, and plenty of good warm words to dress them in.
Facts always yield the place of honor, in conversation, to thoughts
about facts; but if a false note is uttered, down comes the finger
on the key and the man of facts asserts his true dignity.  I have
known three of these men of facts, at least, who were always
formidable,--and one of them was tyrannical.

--Yes, a man sometimes makes a grand appearance on a particular
occasion; but these men knew something about almost everything, and
never made mistakes.--He?  Veneers in first-rate style.  The
mahogany scales off now and then in spots, and then you see the
cheap light stuff--I found--very fine in conversational
information, the other day when we were in company.  The talk ran
upon mountains.  He was wonderfully well acquainted with the
leading facts about the Andes, the Apennines, and the Appalachians;
he had nothing in particular to say about Ararat, Ben Nevis, and
various other mountains that were mentioned.  By and by some
Revolutionary anecdote came up, and he showed singular familiarity
with the lives of the Adamses, and gave many details relating to
Major Andre.  A point of Natural History being suggested, he gave
an excellent account of the air-bladder of fishes.  He was very
full upon the subject of agriculture, but retired from the
conversation when horticulture was introduced in the discussion.
So he seemed well acquainted with the geology of anthracite, but
did not pretend to know anything of other kinds of coal.  There was
something so odd about the extent and limitations of his knowledge,
that I suspected all at once what might be the meaning of it, and
waited till I got an opportunity.--Have you seen the "New American
Cyclopaedia?" said I.--I have, he replied; I received an early
copy.--How far does it go?--He turned red, and answered,--To
Araguay.--Oh, said I to myself,--not quite so far as Ararat;--that
is the reason he knew nothing about it; but he must have read all
the rest straight through, and, if he can remember what is in this
volume until he has read all those that are to come, he will know
more than I ever thought he would.

Since I had this experience, I hear that somebody else has related
a similar story.  I didn't borrow it, for all that.--I made a
comparison at table some time since, which has often been quoted
and received many compliments.  It was that of the mind of a bigot
to the pupil of the eye; the more light you pour on it, the more it
contracts.  The simile is a very obvious, and, I suppose I may now
say, a happy one; for it has just been shown me that it occurs in a
Preface to certain Political Poems of Thomas Moore's published long
before my remark was repeated.  When a person of fair character for
literary honesty uses an image, such as another has employed before
him, the presumption is, that he has struck upon it independently,
or unconsciously recalled it, supposing it his own.

It is impossible to tell, in a great many cases, whether a
comparison which suddenly suggests itself is a new conception or a
recollection.  I told you the other day that I never wrote a line
of verse that seemed to me comparatively good, but it appeared old
at once, and often as if it had been borrowed.  But I confess I
never suspected the above comparison of being old, except from the
fact of its obviousness.  It is proper, however, that I proceed by
a formal instrument to relinquish all claim to any property in an
idea given to the world at about the time when I had just joined
the class in which Master Thomas Moore was then a somewhat advanced
scholar.

I, therefore, in full possession of my native honesty, but knowing
the liability of all men to be elected to public office, and for
that reason feeling uncertain how soon I may be in danger of losing
it, do hereby renounce all claim to being considered the FIRST
person who gave utterance to a certain simile or comparison
referred to in the accompanying documents, and relating to the
pupil of the eye on the one part and the mind of the bigot on the
other.  I hereby relinquish all glory and profit, and especially
all claims to letters from autograph collectors, founded upon my
supposed property in the above comparison,--knowing well, that,
according to the laws of literature, they who speak first hold the
fee of the thing said.  I do also agree that all Editors of
Cyclopedias and Biographical Dictionaries, all Publishers of
Reviews and Papers, and all Critics writing therein, shall be at
liberty to retract or qualify any opinion predicated on the
supposition that I was the sole and undisputed author of the above
comparison.  But, inasmuch as I do affirm that the comparison
aforesaid was uttered by me in the firm belief that it was new and
wholly my own, and as I have good reason to think that I had never
seen or heard it when first expressed by me, and as it is well
known that different persons may independently utter the same
idea,--as is evinced by that familiar line from Donatus,--

"Pereant illi qui ante nos nostra dixerunt,"--

now, therefore, I do request by this instrument that all
well-disposed persons will abstain from asserting or implying that I
am open to any accusation whatsoever touching the said comparison,
and, if they have so asserted or implied, that they will have the
manliness forthwith to retract the same assertion or insinuation.


I think few persons have a greater disgust for plagiarism than
myself.  If I had even suspected that the idea in question was
borrowed, I should have disclaimed originality, or mentioned the
coincidence, as I once did in a case where I had happened to hit on
an idea of Swift's.--But what shall I do about these verses I was
going to read you?  I am afraid that half mankind would accuse me
of stealing their thoughts, if I printed them.  I am convinced that
several of you, especially if you are getting a little on in life,
will recognize some of these sentiments as having passed through
your consciousness at some time.  I can't help it,--it is too late
now.  The verses are written, and you must have them.  Listen,
then, and you shall hear


WHAT WE ALL THINK.

That age was older once than now,
In spite of locks untimely shed,
Or silvered on the youthful brow;
That babes make love and children wed.

That sunshine had a heavenly glow,
Which faded with those "good old days,"
When winters came with deeper snow,
And autumns with a softer haze.

That--mother, sister, wife, or child--
The "best of women" each has known.
Were schoolboys ever half so wild?
How young the grandpapas have grown,

That BUT FOR THIS our souls were free,
And BUT FOR THAT our lives were blest;
That in some season yet to be
Our cares will leave us time to rest.

Whene'er we groan with ache or pain,
Some common ailment of the race,--
Though doctors think the matter plain,--
That ours is "a peculiar case."

That when like babes with fingers burned
We count one bitter maxim more,
Our lesson all the world has learned,
And men are wiser than before.

That when we sob o'er fancied woes,
The angels hovering overhead
Count every pitying drop that flows
And love us for the tears we shed.

That when we stand with tearless eye
And turn the beggar from our door,
They still approve us when we sigh,
"Ah, had I but ONE THOUSAND MORE!"

That weakness smoothed the path of sin,
In half the slips our youth has known;
And whatsoe'er its blame has been,
That Mercy flowers on faults outgrown.

Though temples crowd the crumbled brink
O'erhanging truth's eternal flow,
Their tablets bold with WHAT WE THINK,
Their echoes dumb to WHAT WE KNOW;

That one unquestioned text we read,
All doubt beyond, all fear above,
Nor crackling pile nor cursing creed
Can burn or blot it:  GOD IS LOVE!



CHAPTER VII



[This particular record is noteworthy principally for containing a
paper by my friend, the Professor, with a poem or two annexed or
intercalated.  I would suggest to young persons that they should
pass over it for the present, and read, instead of it, that story
about the young man who was in love with the young lady, and in
great trouble for something like nine pages, but happily married on
the tenth page or thereabouts, which, I take it for granted, will
be contained in the periodical where this is found, unless it
differ from all other publications of the kind.  Perhaps, if such
young people will lay the number aside, and take it up ten years,
or a little more, from the present time, they may find something in
it for their advantage.  They can't possibly understand it all
now.]

My friend, the Professor, began talking with me one day in a dreary
sort of way.  I couldn't get at the difficulty for a good while,
but at last it turned out that somebody had been calling him an old
man.--He didn't mind his students calling him THE old man, he said.
That was a technical expression, and he thought that he remembered
hearing it applied to himself when he was about twenty-five.  It
may be considered as a familiar and sometimes endearing
appellation.  An Irishwoman calls her husband "the old man," and he
returns the caressing expression by speaking of her as "the old
woman."  But now, said he, just suppose a case like one of these.
A young stranger is overheard talking of you as a very nice old
gentleman.  A friendly and genial critic speaks of your green old
age as illustrating the truth of some axiom you had uttered with
reference to that period of life.  What _I_ call an old man is a
person with a smooth, shining crown and a fringe of scattered white
hairs, seen in the streets on sunshiny days, stooping as he walks,
bearing a cane, moving cautiously and slowly; telling old stories,
smiling at present follies, living in a narrow world of dry habits;
one that remains waking when others have dropped asleep, and keeps
a little night-lamp-flame of life burning year after year, if the
lamp is not upset, and there is only a careful hand held round it
to prevent the puffs of wind from blowing the flame out.  That's
what I call an old man.

Now, said the Professor, you don't mean to tell me that I have got
to that yet?  Why, bless you, I am several years short of the time
when--[I knew what was coming, and could hardly keep from laughing;
twenty years ago he used to quote it as one of those absurd
speeches men of genius will make, and now he is going to argue from
it]--several years short of the time when Balzac says that men are
--most--you know--dangerous to--the hearts of--in short, most to be
dreaded by duennas that have charge of susceptible females.--What
age is that? said I, statistically.--Fifty-two years, answered the
Professor.--Balzac ought to know, said I, if it is true that Goethe
said of him that each of his stories must have been dug out of a
woman's heart.  But fifty-two is a high figure.

Stand in the light of the window, Professor, said I.---The
Professor took up the desired position.--You have white hairs, I
said.--Had 'em any time these twenty years, said the Professor.
--And the crow's-foot,--pes anserinus, rather.--The Professor smiled,
as I wanted him to, and the folds radiated like the ridges of a
half-opened fan, from the outer corner of the eyes to the temples.
--And the calipers said I.--What are the calipers? he asked,
curiously.--Why, the parenthesis, said I.--Parenthesis? said the
Professor; what's that?--Why, look in the glass when you are
disposed to laugh, and see if your mouth isn't framed in a couple
of crescent lines,--so, my boy ( ).--It's all nonsense, said the
Professor; just look at my BICEPS;--and he began pulling off his
coat to show me his arm.  Be careful, said I; you can't bear
exposure to the air, at your time of life, as you could once.--I
will box with you, said the Professor, row with you, walk with you,
ride with you, swim with you, or sit at table with you, for fifty
dollars a side.--Pluck survives stamina, I answered.

The Professor went off a little out of humor.  A few weeks
afterwards he came in, looking very good-natured, and brought me a
paper, which I have here, and from which I shall read you some
portions, if you don't object.  He had been thinking the matter
over, he said,--had read Cicero "De Senectute," and made up his
mind to meet old age half way.  These were some of his reflections
that he had written down; so here you have.


THE PROFESSOR'S PAPER.


There is no doubt when old age begins.  The human body is a furnace
which keeps in blast three-score years and ten, more or less.  It
burns about three hundred pounds of carbon a year, (besides other
fuel,) when in fair working order, according to a great chemist's
estimate.  When the fire slackens, life declines; when it goes out,
we are dead.

It has been shown by some noted French experimenters, that the
amount of combustion increases up to about the thirtieth year,
remains stationary to about forty-five, and then diminishes.  This
last is the point where old age starts from.  The great fact of
physical life is the perpetual commerce with the elements, and the
fire is the measure of it.

About this time of life, if food is plenty where you live,--for
that, you know, regulates matrimony,--you may be expecting to find
yourself a grandfather some fine morning; a kind of domestic
felicity that gives one a cool shiver of delight to think of, as
among the not remotely possible events.

I don't mind much those slipshod lines Dr. Johnson wrote to Thrale,
telling her about life's declining from THIRTY-FIVE; the furnace is
in full blast for ten years longer, as I have said.  The Romans
came very near the mark; their age of enlistment reached from
seventeen to forty-six years.

What is the use of fighting against the seasons, or the tides, or
the movements of the planetary bodies, or this ebb in the wave of
life that flows through us?  We are old fellows from the moment the
fire begins to go out.  Let us always behave like gentlemen when we
are introduced to new acquaintance.


Incipit Allegoria Senectutis.


Old Age, this is Mr. Professor; Mr. Professor, this is Old Age.

Old Age.--Mr. Professor, I hope to see you well.  I have known you
for some time, though I think you did not know me.  Shall we walk
down the street together?

Professor (drawing back a little).--We can talk more quietly,
perhaps, in my study.  Will you tell me how it is you seem to be
acquainted with everybody you are introduced to, though he
evidently considers you an entire stranger?

Old Age.--I make it a rule never to force myself upon a person's
recognition until I have known him at least FIVE YEARS.

Professor.--Do you mean to say that you have known me so long as
that?

Old Age.  I do.  I left my card on you longer ago than that, but I
am afraid you never read it; yet I see you have it with you.

Professor.--Where?

Old Age.--There, between your eyebrows,--three straight lines
running up and down; all the probate courts know that token,--"Old
Age, his mark."  Put your forefinger on the inner end of one
eyebrow, and your middle finger on the inner end of the other
eyebrow; now separate the fingers, and you will smooth out my
sign-manual; that's the way you used to look before I left my card
on you.

Professor.--What message do people generally send back when you
first call on them?

Old Age.--Not at home.  Then I leave a card and go.  Next year I
call; get the same answer; leave another card.  So for five or
six,--sometimes ten years or more.  At last, if they don't let me
in, I break in through the front door or the windows.

We talked together in this way some time.  Then Old Age said
again,--Come, let us walk down the street together,--and offered me
a cane, an eyeglass, a tippet, and a pair of over-shoes.--No, much
obliged to you, said I.  I don't want those things, and I had a
little rather talk with you here, privately, in my study.  So I
dressed myself up in a jaunty way and walked out alone;--got a
fall, caught a cold, was laid up with a lumbago, and had time to
think over this whole matter.


Explicit Allegoria Senectutis.


We have settled when old age begins.  Like all Nature's processes,
it is gentle and gradual in its approaches, strewed with illusions,
and all its little griefs soothed by natural sedatives.  But the
iron hand is not less irresistible because it wears the velvet
glove.  The button-wood throws off its bark in large flakes, which
one may find lying at its foot, pushed out, and at last pushed off,
by that tranquil movement from beneath, which is too slow to be
seen, but too powerful to be arrested.  One finds them always, but
one rarely sees them fall.  So it is our youth drops from us,
--scales off, sapless and lifeless, and lays bare the tender and
immature fresh growth of old age.  Looked at collectively, the
changes of old age appear as a series of personal insults and
indignities, terminating at last in death, which Sir Thomas Browne
has called "the very disgrace and ignominy of our nature."


My lady's cheek can boast no more
The cranberry white and pink it wore;
And where her shining locks divide,
The parting line is all too wide--


No, no,--this will never do.  Talk about men, if you will, but
spare the poor women.

We have a brief description of seven stages of life by a remarkably
good observer.  It is very presumptuous to attempt to add to it,
yet I have been struck with the fact that life admits of a natural
analysis into no less than fifteen distinct periods.  Taking the
five primary divisions, infancy, childhood, youth, manhood, old
age, each of these has its own three periods of immaturity,
complete development, and decline.  I recognize on OLD baby at
once,--with its "pipe and mug," (a stick of candy and a
porringer,)--so does everybody; and an old child shedding its
milk-teeth is only a little prototype of the old man shedding his
permanent ones.  Fifty or thereabouts is only the childhood, as it
were, of old age; the graybeard youngster must be weaned from his
late suppers now.  So you will see that you have to make fifteen
stages at any rate, and that it would not be hard to make
twenty-five; five primary, each with five secondary divisions.

The infancy and childhood of commencing old age have the same
ingenuous simplicity and delightful unconsciousness about them as
the first stage of the earlier periods of life shows.  The great
delusion of mankind is in supposing that to be individual and
exceptional which is universal and according to law.  A person is
always startled when he hears himself seriously called an old man
for the first time.

Nature gets us out of youth into manhood, as sailors are hurried on
board of vessels,--in a state of intoxication.  We are hustled into
maturity reeling with our passions and imaginations, and we have
drifted far away from port before we awake out of our illusions.
But to carry us out of maturity into old age, without our knowing
where we are going, she drugs us with strong opiates, and so we
stagger along with wide open eyes that see nothing until snow
enough has fallen on our heads to rouse our comatose brains out of
their stupid trances.

There is one mark of age that strikes me more than any of the
physical ones;--I mean the formation of Habits.  An old man who
shrinks into himself falls into ways that become as positive and as
much beyond the reach of outside influences as if they were
governed by clock-work.  The ANIMAL functions, as the physiologists
call them, in distinction from the ORGANIC, tend, in the process of
deterioration to which age and neglect united gradually lead them,
to assume the periodical or rhythmical type of movement.  Every
man's HEART (this organ belongs, you know, to the organic system)
has a regular mode of action; but I know a great many men whose
BRAINS, and all their voluntary existence flowing from their
brains, have a systole and diastole as regular as that of the heart
itself.  Habit is the approximation of the animal system to the
organic.  It is a confession of failure in the highest function of
being, which involves a perpetual self-determination, in full view
of all existing circumstances.  But habit, you see, is an action in
present circumstances from past motives.  It is substituting a vis
a tergo for the evolution of living force.

When a man, instead of burning up three hundred pounds of carbon a
year, has got down to two hundred and fifty, it is plain enough he
must economize force somewhere.  Now habit is a labor-saving
invention which enables a man to get along with less fuel,--that is
all; for fuel is force, you know, just as much in the page I am
writing for you as in the locomotive or the legs that carry it to
you.  Carbon is the same thing, whether you call it wood, or coal,
or bread and cheese.  A reverend gentleman demurred to this
statement,--as if, because combustion is asserted to be the sine
qua non of thought, therefore thought is alleged to be a purely
chemical process.  Facts of chemistry are one thing, I told him,
and facts of consciousness another.  It can be proved to him, by a
very simple analysis of some of his spare elements, that every
Sunday, when he does his duty faithfully, he uses up more
phosphorus out of his brain and nerves than on ordinary days.  But
then he had his choice whether to do his duty, or to neglect it,
and save his phosphorus and other combustibles.

It follows from all this that THE FORMATION OF HABITS ought
naturally to be, as it is, the special characteristic of age.  As
for the muscular powers, they pass their maximum long before the
time when the true decline of life begins, if we may judge by the
experience of the ring.  A man is "stale," I think, in their
language, soon after thirty,--often, no doubt, much earlier, as
gentlemen of the pugilistic profession are exceedingly apt to keep
their vital fire burning WITH THE BLOWER UP.

--So far without Tully.  But in the mean time I have been reading
the treatise, "De Senectute."  It is not long, but a leisurely
performance.  The old gentleman was sixty-three years of age when
he addressed it to his friend T. Pomponius Atticus, Eq., a person
of distinction, some two or three years older.  We read it when we
are schoolboys, forget all about it for thirty years, and then take
it up again by a natural instinct,--provided always that we read
Latin as we drink water, without stopping to taste it, as all of us
who ever learned it at school or college ought to do.

Cato is the chief speaker in the dialogue.  A good deal of it is
what would be called in vulgar phrase "slow."  It unpacks and
unfolds incidental illustrations which a modern writer would look
at the back of, and toss each to its pigeon-hole.  I think ancient
classics and ancient people are alike in the tendency to this kind
of expansion.

An old doctor came to me once (this is literal fact) with some
contrivance or other for people with broken kneepans.  As the
patient would be confined for a good while, he might find it dull
work to sit with his hands in his lap.  Reading, the ingenious
inventor suggested, would be an agreeable mode of passing the time.
He mentioned, in his written account of his contrivance, various
works that might amuse the weary hour.  I remember only three,--Don
Quixote, Tom Jones, and WATTS ON THE MIND.

It is not generally understood that Cicero's essay was delivered as
a lyceum lecture, (concio popularis,) at the Temple of Mercury.
The journals (papyri) of the day ("Tempora Quotidiana,"--"Tribuinus
Quirinalis,"--"Praeco Romanus," and the rest) gave abstracts of it,
one of which I have translated and modernized, as being a
substitute for the analysis I intended to make.

IV.  Kal.  Mart. . . . .

The lecture at the Temple of Mercury, last evening, was well
attended by the elite of our great city.  Two hundred thousand
sestertia were thought to have been represented in the house.  The
doors were besieged by a mob of shabby fellows, (illotum vulgus,)
who were at length quieted after two or three had been somewhat
roughly handled (gladio jugulati).  The speaker was the well-known
Mark Tully, Eq.,--the subject Old Age.  Mr. T. has a lean and
scraggy person, with a very unpleasant excrescence upon his nasal
feature, from which his nickname of CHICK-PEA (Cicero) is said by
some to be derived.  As a lecturer is public property, we may
remark, that his outer garment (toga) was of cheap stuff and
somewhat worn, and that his general style and appearance of dress
and manner (habitus, vestitusque) were somewhat provincial.

The lecture consisted of an imaginary dialogue between Cato and
Laelius.  We found the first portion rather heavy, and retired a
few moments for refreshment (pocula quaedam vini).--All want to
reach old age, says Cato, and grumble when they get it; therefore
they are donkeys.--The lecturer will allow us to say that he is the
donkey; we know we shall grumble at old age, but we want to live
through youth and manhood, IN SPITE of the troubles we shall groan
over.--There was considerable prosing as to what old age can do and
can't.--True, but not new.  Certainly, old folks can't jump,--break
the necks of their thigh-bones, (femorum cervices,) if they do;
can't crack nuts with their teeth; can't climb a greased pole
(malum inunctum scandere non possunt); but they can tell old
stories and give you good advice; if they know what you have made
up your mind to do when you ask them.--All this is well enough, but
won't set the Tiber on fire (Tiberim accendere nequaquam potest.)

There were some clever things enough, (dicta hand inepta,) a few of
which are worth reporting.--Old people are accused of being
forgetful; but they never forget where they have put their money.
--Nobody is so old he doesn't think he can live a year.--The lecturer
quoted an ancient maxim,--Grow old early, if you would be old
long,--but disputed it.--Authority, he thought, was the chief
privilege of age.--It is not great to have money, but fine to
govern those that have it.--Old age begins at FORTY-SIX years,
according to the common opinion.--It is not every kind of old age
or of wine that grows sour with time.--Some excellent remarks were
made on immortality, but mainly borrowed from and credited to
Plato.--Several pleasing anecdotes were told.--Old Milo, champion
of the heavy weights in his day, looked at his arms and whimpered,
"They are dead."  Not so dead as you, you old fool,--says Cato;
--you never were good for anything but for your shoulders and
flanks.--Pisistratus asked Solon what made him dare to be so
obstinate.  Old age, said Solon.

The lecture was on the whole acceptable, and a credit to our
culture and civilization.--The reporter goes on to state that there
will be no lecture next week, on account of the expected combat
between the bear and the barbarian.  Betting (sponsio) two to one
(duo ad unum) on the bear.


--After all, the most encouraging things I find in the treatise,
"De Senectute," are the stories of men who have found new
occupations when growing old, or kept up their common pursuits in
the extreme period of life.  Cato learned Greek when he was old,
and speaks of wishing to learn the fiddle, or some such instrument,
(fidibus,) after the example of Socrates.  Solon learned something
new, every day, in his old age, as he gloried to proclaim.  Cyrus
pointed out with pride and pleasure the trees he had planted with
his own hand.  [I remember a pillar on the Duke of Northumberland's
estate at Alnwick, with an inscription in similar words, if not the
same.  That, like other country pleasures, never wears out.  None
is too rich, none too poor, none too young, none too old to enjoy
it.]  There is a New England story I have heard more to the point,
however, than any of Cicero's.  A young farmer was urged to set out
some apple-trees.--No, said he, they are too long growing, and I
don't want to plant for other people.  The young farmer's father
was spoken to about it, but he, with better reason, alleged that
apple-trees were slow and life was fleeting.  At last some one
mentioned it to the old grandfather of the young farmer.  He had
nothing else to do,--so he stuck in some trees.  He lived long
enough to drink barrels of cider made from the apples that grew on
those trees.

As for myself, after visiting a friend lately,--[Do remember all
the time that this is the Professor's paper.]--I satisfied myself
that I had better concede the fact that--my contemporaries are not
so young as they have been,--and that,--awkward as it is,--science
and history agree in telling me that I can claim the immunities and
must own the humiliations of the early stage of senility.  Ah! but
we have all gone down the hill together.  The dandies of my time
have split their waistbands and taken to high-low shoes.  The
beauties of my recollections--where are they?  They have run the
gantlet of the years as well as I.  First the years pelted them
with red roses till their cheeks were all on fire.  By and by they
began throwing white roses, and that morning flush passed away.  At
last one of the years threw a snow-ball, and after that no year let
the poor girls pass without throwing snow-balls.  And then came
rougher missiles,--ice and stones; and from time to time an arrow
whistled, and down went one of the poor girls.  So there are but
few left; and we don't call those few GIRLS, but--

Ah, me!  Here am I groaning just as the old Greek sighed Ai, ai!
and the old Roman, Eheu!  I have no doubt we should die of shame
and grief at the indignities offered us by age, if it were not that
we see so many others as badly or worse off than ourselves.  We
always compare ourselves with our contemporaries.

[I was interrupted in my reading just here.  Before I began at the
next breakfast, I read them these verses;--I hope you will like
them, and get a useful lesson from them.]


THE LAST BLOSSOM.


Though young no more, we still would dream
Of beauty's dear deluding wiles;
The leagues of life to graybeards seem
Shorter than boyhood's lingering miles.

Who knows a woman's wild caprice?
It played with Goethe's silvered hair,
And many a Holy Father's "niece"
Has softly smoothed the papal chair.

When sixty bids us sigh in vain
To melt the heart of sweet sixteen,
We think upon those ladies twain
Who loved so well the tough old Dean.

We see the Patriarch's wintry face,
The maid of Egypt's dusky glow,
And dream that Youth and Age embrace,
As April violets fill with snow.

Tranced in her Lord's Olympian smile
His lotus-loving Memphian lies,--
The musky daughter of the Nile
With plaited hair and almond eyes.

Might we but share one wild caress
Ere life's autumnal blossoms fall,
And Earth's brown, clinging lips impress
The long cold kiss that waits us all!

My bosom heaves, remembering yet
The morning of that blissful day
When Rose, the flower of spring, I met,
And gave my raptured soul away.

Flung from her eyes of purest blue,
A lasso, with its leaping chain
Light as a loop of larkspurs, flew
O'er sense and spirit, heart and brain.

Thou com'st to cheer my waning age,
Sweet vision, waited for so long!
Dove that would seek the poet's cage
Lured by the magic breath of song!

She blushes!  Ah, reluctant maid,
Love's drapeau rouge the truth has told!
O'er girlhood's yielding barricade
Floats the great Leveller's crimson fold!

Come to my arms!--love heeds not years
No frost the bud of passion knows.--
Ha! what is this my frenzy hears?
A voice behind me uttered,--Rose!

Sweet was her smile,--but not for me;
Alas, when woman looks TOO kind,
Just turn your foolish head and see,--
Some youth is walking close behind!


As to GIVING UP because the almanac or the Family-Bible says that
it is about time to do it, I have no intention of doing any such
thing.  I grant you that I burn less carbon than some years ago.  I
see people of my standing really good for nothing, decrepit,
effete, la levre inferieure deja pendante, with what little life
they have left mainly concentrated in their epigastrium.  But as
the disease of old age is epidemic, endemic, and sporadic, and
everybody that lives long enough is sure to catch it, I am going to
say, for the encouragement of such as need it, how I treat the
malady in my own case.

First.  As I feel, that, when I have anything to do, there is less
time for it than when I was younger, I find that I give my
attention more thoroughly, and use my time more economically than
ever before; so that I can learn anything twice as easily as in my
earlier days.  I am not, therefore, afraid to attack a new study.
I took up a difficult language a very few years ago with good
success, and think of mathematics and metaphysics by-and-by.

Secondly.  I have opened my eyes to a good many neglected
privileges and pleasures within my reach, and requiring only a
little courage to enjoy them.  You may well suppose it pleased me
to find that old Cato was thinking of learning to play the fiddle,
when I had deliberately taken it up in my old age, and satisfied
myself that I could get much comfort, if not much music, out of it.

Thirdly.  I have found that some of those active exercises, which
are commonly thought to belong to young folks only, may be enjoyed
at a much later period.

A young friend has lately written an admirable article in one of
the journals, entitled, "Saints and their Bodies."  Approving of
his general doctrines, and grateful for his records of personal
experience, I cannot refuse to add my own experimental confirmation
of his eulogy of one particular form of active exercise and
amusement, namely, BOATING.  For the past nine years, I have rowed
about, during a good part of the summer, on fresh or salt water.
My present fleet on the river Charles consists of three row-boats.
1. A small flat-bottomed skiff of the shape of a flat-iron, kept
mainly to lend to boys.  2. A fancy "dory" for two pairs of sculls,
in which I sometimes go out with my young folks.  3. My own
particular water-sulky, a "skeleton" or "shell" race-boat,
twenty-two feet long, with huge outriggers, which boat I pull with
ten-foot sculls,--alone, of course, as it holds but one, and tips him
out, if he doesn't mind what he is about.  In this I glide around
the Back Bay, down the stream, up the Charles to Cambridge and
Watertown, up the Mystic, round the wharves, in the wake of
steamboats which leave a swell after them delightful to rock upon;
I linger under the bridges,--those "caterpillar bridges," as my
brother professor so happily called them; rub against the black
sides of old wood-schooners; cool down under the overhanging stern
of some tall Indiaman; stretch across to the Navy-Yard, where the
sentinel warns me off from the Ohio,--just as if I should hurt her
by lying in her shadow; then strike out into the harbor, where the
water gets clear and the air smells of the ocean,--till all at once
I remember, that, if a west wind blows up of a sudden, I shall
drift along past the islands, out of sight of the dear old
State-house,--plate, tumbler, knife and fork all waiting at home,
but no chair drawn up at the table,--all the dear people waiting,
waiting, waiting, while the boat is sliding, sliding, sliding into
the great desert, where there is no tree and no fountain.  As I don't
want my wreck to be washed up on one of the beaches in company with
devil's-aprons, bladder-weeds, dead horse-shoes, and bleached
crab-shells, I turn about and flap my long narrow wings for home.
When the tide is running out swiftly, I have a splendid fight to get
through the bridges, but always make it a rule to beat,--though I
have been jammed up into pretty tight places at times, and was caught
once between a vessel swinging round and the pier, until our bones
(the boat's, that is) cracked as if we had been in the jaws of
Behemoth.  Then back to my moorings at the foot of the Common, off
with the rowing-dress, dash under the green translucent wave, return
to the garb of civilization, walk through my Garden, take a look at
my elms on the Common, and, reaching my habitat, in consideration of
my advanced period of life, indulge in the Elysian abandonment of a
huge recumbent chair.

When I have established a pair of well-pronounced feathering-
calluses on my thumbs, when I am in training so that I can do my
fifteen miles at a stretch without coming to grief in any way, when
I can perform my mile in eight minutes or a little less, then I
feel as if I had old Time's head in chancery, and could give it to
him at my leisure.

I do not deny the attraction of walking.  I have bored this ancient
city through and through in my daily travels, until I know it as an
old inhabitant of a Cheshire knows his cheese.  Why, it was I who,
in the course of these rambles, discovered that remarkable avenue
called Myrtle Street, stretching in one long line from east of the
Reservoir to a precipitous and rudely paved cliff which looks down
on the grim abode of Science, and beyond it to the far hills; a
promenade so delicious in its repose, so cheerfully varied with
glimpses down the northern slope into busy Cambridge Street with
its iron river of the horse-railroad, and wheeled barges gliding
back and forward over it,--so delightfully closing at its western
extremity in sunny courts and passages where I know peace, and
beauty, and virtue, and serene old age must be perpetual tenants,
--so alluring to all who desire to take their daily stroll, in the
words of Dr. Watts,--

"Alike unknowing and unknown,"--

that nothing but a sense of duty would have prompted me to reveal
the secret of its existence.  I concede, therefore, that walking is
an immeasurably fine invention, of which old age ought constantly
to avail itself.

Saddle-leather is in some respects even preferable to sole-leather.
The principal objection to it is of a financial character.  But you
may be sure that Bacon and Sydenham did not recommend it for
nothing.  One's hepar, or, in vulgar language, liver,--a ponderous
organ, weighing some three or four pounds,--goes up and down like
the dasher of a churn in the midst of the other vital arrangements,
at every step of a trotting horse.  The brains also are shaken up
like coppers in a money-box.  Riding is good, for those that are
born with a silver-mounted bridle in their hand, and can ride as
much and as often as they like, without thinking all the time they
hear that steady grinding sound as the horse's jaws triturate with
calm lateral movement the bank-bills and promises to pay upon which
it is notorious that the profligate animal in question feeds day
and night.

Instead, however, of considering these kinds of exercise in this
empirical way, I will devote a brief space to an examination of
them in a more scientific form.

The pleasure of exercise is due first to a purely physical
impression, and secondly to a sense of power in action.  The first
source of pleasure varies of course with our condition and the
state of the surrounding circumstances; the second with the amount
and kind of power, and the extent and kind of action.  In all forms
of active exercise there are three powers simultaneously in
action,--the will, the muscles, and the intellect.  Each of these
predominates in different kinds of exercise.  In walking, the will
and muscles are so accustomed to work together and perform their
task with so little expenditure of force, that the intellect is
left comparatively free.  The mental pleasure in walking, as such,
is in the sense of power over all our moving machinery.  But in
riding, I have the additional pleasure of governing another will,
and my muscles extend to the tips of the animal's ears and to his
four hoofs, instead of stopping at my hands and feet.  Now in this
extension of my volition and my physical frame into another animal,
my tyrannical instincts and my desire for heroic strength are at
once gratified.  When the horse ceases to have a will of his own
and his muscles require no special attention on your part, then you
may live on horseback as Wesley did, and write sermons or take
naps, as you like.  But you will observe, that, in riding on
horseback, you always have a feeling, that, after all, it is not
you that do the work, but the animal, and this prevents the
satisfaction from being complete.

Now let us look at the conditions of rowing.  I won't suppose you
to be disgracing yourself in one of those miserable tubs, tugging
in which is to rowing the true boat what riding a cow is to
bestriding an Arab.  You know the Esquimaux kayak, (if that is the
name of it,) don't you?  Look at that model of one over my door.
Sharp, rather?--On the contrary, it is a lubber to the one you and
I must have; a Dutch fish-wife to Psyche, contrasted with what I
will tell you about.--Our boat, then, is something of the shape of
a pickerel, as you look down upon his back, he lying in the
sunshine just where the sharp edge of the water cuts in among the
lily-pads.  It is a kind of a giant pod, as one may say,--tight
everywhere, except in a little place in the middle, where you sit.
Its length is from seven to ten yards, and as it is only from
sixteen to thirty inches wide in its widest part, you understand
why you want those "outriggers," or projecting iron frames with the
rowlocks in which the oars play.  My rowlocks are five feet apart;
double the greatest width of the boat.

Here you are, then, afloat with a body a rod and a half long, with
arms, or wings, as you may choose to call them, stretching more
than twenty feet from tip to tip; every volition of yours extending
as perfectly into them as if your spinal cord ran down the centre
strip of your boat, and the nerves of your arms tingled as far as
the broad blades of your oars,--oars of spruce, balanced,
leathered, and ringed under your own special direction.  This, in
sober earnest, is the nearest approach to flying that man has ever
made or perhaps ever will make.  As the hawk sails without flapping
his pinions, so you drift with the tide when you will, in the most
luxurious form of locomotion indulged to an embodied spirit.  But
if your blood wants rousing, turn round that stake in the river,
which you see a mile from here; and when you come in in sixteen
minutes, (if you do, for we are old boys, and not champion
scullers, you remember,) then say if you begin to feel a little
warmed up or not!  You can row easily and gently all day, and you
can row yourself blind and black in the face in ten minutes, just
as you like.  It has been long agreed that there is no way in which
a man can accomplish so much labor with his muscles as in rowing.
It is in the boat, then, that man finds the largest extension of
his volitional and muscular existence; and yet he may tax both of
them so slightly, in that most delicious of exercises, that he
shall mentally write his sermon, or his poem, or recall the remarks
he has made in company and put them in form for the public, as well
as in his easy-chair.

I dare not publicly name the rare joys, the infinite delights, that
intoxicate me on some sweet June morning, when the river and bay
are smooth as a sheet of beryl-green silk, and I run along ripping
it up with my knife-edged shell of a boat, the rent closing after
me like those wounds of angels which Milton tells of, but the seam
still shining for many a long rood behind me.  To lie still over
the Flats, where the waters are shallow, and see the crabs crawling
and the sculpins gliding busily and silently beneath the boat,--to
rustle in through the long harsh grass that leads up some tranquil
creek,--to take shelter from the sunbeams under one of the
thousand-footed bridges, and look down its interminable colonnades,
crusted with green and oozy growths, studded with minute barnacles,
and belted with rings of dark muscles, while overhead streams and
thunders that other river whose every wave is a human soul flowing
to eternity as the river below flows to the ocean,--lying there
moored unseen, in loneliness so profound that the columns of Tadmor
in the Desert could not seem more remote from life,--the cool
breeze on one's forehead, the stream whispering against the
half-sunken pillars,--why should I tell of these things, that I
should live to see my beloved haunts invaded and the waves blackened
with boats as with a swarm of water-beetles?  What a city of idiots
we must be not to have covered this glorious bay with gondolas and
wherries, as we have just learned to cover the ice in winter with
skaters!

I am satisfied that such a set of black-coated, stiff-jointed,
soft-muscled, paste-complexioned youth as we can boast in our
Atlantic cities never before sprang from loins of Anglo-Saxon
lineage.  Of the females that are the mates of these males I do not
here speak.  I preached my sermon from the lay-pulpit on this
matter a good while ago.  Of course, if you heard it, you know my
belief is that the total climatic influences here are getting up a
number of new patterns of humanity, some of which are not an
improvement on the old model.  Clipper-built, sharp in the bows,
long in the spars, slender to look at, and fast to go, the ship,
which is the great organ of our national life of relation, is but a
reproduction of the typical form which the elements impress upon
its builder.  All this we cannot help; but we can make the best of
these influences, such as they are.  We have a few good boatmen,
--no good horsemen that I hear of,--I cannot speak for cricketing,
--but as for any great athletic feat performed by a gentleman in
these latitudes, society would drop a man who should run round the
Common in five minutes.  Some of our amateur fencers, single-stick
players, and boxers, we have no reason to be ashamed of.  Boxing is
rough play, but not too rough for a hearty young fellow.  Anything
is better than this white-blooded degeneration to which we all
tend.

I dropped into a gentlemen's sparring exhibition only last evening.
It did my heart good to see that there were a few young and
youngish youths left who could take care of their own heads in case
of emergency.  It is a fine sight, that of a gentleman resolving
himself into the primitive constituents of his humanity.  Here is a
delicate young man now, with an intellectual countenance, a slight
figure, a sub-pallid complexion, a most unassuming deportment, a
mild adolescent in fact, that any Hiram or Jonathan from between
the ploughtails would of course expect to handle with perfect ease.
Oh, he is taking off his gold-bowed spectacles!  Ah, he is
divesting himself of his cravat!  Why, he is stripping off his
coat!  Well, here he is, sure enough, in a tight silk shirt, and
with two things that look like batter puddings in the place of his
fists.  Now see that other fellow with another pair of batter
puddings,--the big one with the broad shoulders; he will certainly
knock the little man's head off, if he strikes him.  Feinting,
dodging, stopping, hitting, countering,--little man's head not off
yet.  You might as well try to jump upon your own shadow as to hit
the little man's intellectual features.  He needn't have taken off
the gold-bowed spectacles at all.  Quick, cautious, shifty, nimble,
cool, he catches all the fierce lunges or gets out of their reach,
till his turn comes, and then, whack goes one of the batter
puddings against the big one's ribs, and bang goes the other into
the big one's face, and, staggering, shuffling, slipping, tripping,
collapsing, sprawling, down goes the big one in a miscellaneous
bundle.--If my young friend, whose excellent article I have
referred to, could only introduce the manly art of self-defence
among the clergy, I am satisfied that we should have better sermons
and an infinitely less quarrelsome church-militant.  A bout with
the gloves would let off the ill-nature, and cure the indigestion,
which, united, have embroiled their subject in a bitter
controversy.  We should then often hear that a point of difference
between an infallible and a heretic, instead of being vehemently
discussed in a series of newspaper articles, had been settled by a
friendly contest in several rounds, at the close of which the
parties shook hands and appeared cordially reconciled.

But boxing you and I are too old for, I am afraid.  I was for a
moment tempted, by the contagion of muscular electricity last
evening, to try the gloves with the Benicia Boy, who looked in as a
friend to the noble art; but remembering that he had twice my
weight and half my age, besides the advantage of his training, I
sat still and said nothing.

There is one other delicate point I wish to speak of with reference
to old age.  I refer to the use of dioptric media which correct the
diminished refracting power of the humors of the eye,--in other
words, spectacles.  I don't use them.  All I ask is a large, fair
type, a strong daylight or gas-light, and one yard of focal
distance, and my eyes are as good as ever.  But if YOUR eyes fail,
I can tell you something encouraging.  There is now living in New
York State an old gentleman who, perceiving his sight to fail,
immediately took to exercising it on the finest print, and in this
way fairly bullied Nature out of her foolish habit of taking
liberties at five-and-forty, or thereabout.  And now this old
gentleman performs the most extraordinary feats with his pen,
showing that his eyes must be a pair of microscopes.  I should be
afraid to say to you how much he writes in the compass of a
half-dime,--whether the Psalms or the Gospels, or the Psalms
AND the Gospels, I won't be positive.

But now let rue tell you this.  If the time comes when you must lay
down the fiddle and the bow, because your fingers are too stiff,
and drop the ten-foot sculls, because your arms are too weak, and,
after dallying awhile with eye-glasses, come at last to the
undisguised reality of spectacles,--if the time comes when that
fire of life we spoke of has burned so low that where its flames
reverberated there is only the sombre stain of regret, and where
its coals glowed, only the white ashes that cover the embers of
memory,--don't let your heart grow cold, and you may carry
cheerfulness and love with you into the teens of your second
century, if you can last so long.  As our friend, the Poet, once
said, in some of those old-fashioned heroics of his which he keeps
for his private reading,--

Call him not old, whose visionary brain
Holds o'er the past its undivided reign.
For him in vain the envious seasons roll
Who bears eternal summer in his soul.
If yet the minstrel's song, the poet's lay,
Spring with her birds, or children with their play,
Or maiden's smile, or heavenly dream of art
Stir the few life-drops creeping round his heart,--
Turn to the record where his years are told,--
Count his gray hairs,--they cannot make him old!

End of the Professor's paper.


[The above essay was not read at one time, but in several
instalments, and accompanied by various comments from different
persons at the table.  The company were in the main attentive, with
the exception of a little somnolence on the part of the old
gentleman opposite at times, and a few sly, malicious questions
about the "old boys" on the part of that forward young fellow who
has figured occasionally, not always to his advantage, in these
reports.

On Sunday mornings, in obedience to a feeling I am not ashamed of,
I have always tried to give a more appropriate character to our
conversation.  I have never read them my sermon yet, and I don't
know that I shall, as some of them might take my convictions as a
personal indignity to themselves.  But having read our company so
much of the Professor's talk about age and other subjects connected
with physical life, I took the next Sunday morning to repeat to
them the following poem of his, which I have had by me some time.
He calls it--I suppose, for his professional friends--THE
ANATOMIST'S HYMN, but I shall name it--]


THE LIVING TEMPLE.

Not in the world of light alone,
Where God has built his blazing throne,
Nor yet alone in earth below,
With belted seas that come and go,
And endless isles of sunlit green,
Is all thy Maker's glory seen:
Look in upon thy wondrous frame,--
Eternal wisdom still the same!

The smooth, soft air with pulse-like waves
Flows murmuring through its hidden caves
Whose streams of brightening purple rush
Fired with a new and livelier blush,
While all their burden of decay
The ebbing current steals away,
And red with Nature's flame they start
From the warm fountains of the heart.

No rest that throbbing slave may ask,
Forever quivering o'er his task,
While far and wide a crimson jet
Leaps forth to fill the woven net
Which in unnumbered crossing tides
The flood of burning life divides,
Then kindling each decaying part
Creeps back to find the throbbing heart.

But warmed with that uchanging flame
Behold the outward moving frame,
Its living marbles jointed strong
With glistening band and silvery thong,
And linked to reason's guiding reins
By myriad rings in trembling chains,
Each graven with the threaded zone
Which claims it as the master's own.

See how yon beam of seeming white
Is braided out of seven-hued light,
Yet in those lucid globes no ray
By any chance shall break astray.
Hark how the rolling surge of sound,
Arches and spirals circling round,
Wakes the hushed spirit through thine ear
With music it is heaven to hear.

Then mark the cloven sphere that holds
All thought in its mysterious folds,
That feels sensation's faintest thrill
And flashes forth the sovereign will;
Think on the stormy world that dwells
Locked in its dim and clustering cells!
The lightning gleams of power it sheds
Along its hollow glassy threads!

O Father! grant thy love divine
To make these mystic temples thine!
When wasting age and wearying strife
Have sapped the leaning walls of life,
When darkness gathers over all,
And the last tottering pillars fall,
Take the poor dust thy mercy warms
And mould it into heavenly forms!



CHAPTER VIII



[Spring has come.  You will find some verses to that effect at the
end of these notes.  If you are an impatient reader, skip to them
at once.  In reading aloud, omit, if you please, the sixth and
seventh verses.  These are parenthetical and digressive, and,
unless your audience is of superior intelligence, will confuse
them.  Many people can ride on horseback who find it hard to get on
and to get off without assistance.  One has to dismount from an
idea, and get into the saddle again, at every parenthesis.]

--The old gentleman who sits opposite, finding that spring had
fairly come, mounted a white hat one day, and walked into the
street.  It seems to have been a premature or otherwise
exceptionable exhibition, not unlike that commemorated by the late
Mr. Bayly.  When the old gentleman came home, he looked very red in
the face, and complained that he had been "made sport of."  By
sympathizing questions, I learned from him that a boy had called
him "old daddy," and asked him when he had his hat whitewashed.

This incident led me to make some observations at table the next
morning, which I here repeat for the benefit of the readers of this
record.

--The hat is the vulnerable point of the artificial integument.  I
learned this in early boyhood.  I was once equipped in a hat of
Leghorn straw, having a brim of much wider dimensions than were
usual at that time, and sent to school in that portion of my native
town which lies nearest to this metropolis.  On my way I was met by
a "Port-chuck," as we used to call the young gentlemen of that
locality, and the following dialogue ensued.

The Port-chuck.  Hullo, You-sir, joo know th' wuz gon-to be a race
to-morrah?

Myself.  No.  Who's gon-to run, 'n' wher's't gon-to be?

The Port-chuck.  Squire Mico 'n' Doctor Wiliams, round the brim o'
your hat.

These two much-respected gentlemen being the oldest inhabitants at
that time, and the alleged race-course being out of the question,
the Port-chuck also winking and thrusting his tongue into his
cheek, I perceived that I had been trifled with, and the effect has
been to make me sensitive and observant respecting this article of
dress ever since.  Here is an axiom or two relating to it.

A hat which has been POPPED, or exploded by being sat down upon, is
never itself again afterwards.

It is a favorite illusion of sanguine natures to believe the
contrary.

Shabby gentility has nothing so characteristic as its hat.  There
is always an unnatural calmness about its nap, and an unwholesome
gloss, suggestive of a wet brush.

The last effort of decayed fortune is expended in smoothing its
dilapidated castor.  The hat is the ULTIMUM MORIENS of
"respectability."

--The old gentleman took all these remarks and maxims very
pleasantly, saying, however, that he had forgotten most of his
French except the word for potatoes,--pummies de tare.---Ultimum
moriens, I told him, is old Italian, and signifies LAST THING TO
DIE.  With this explanation he was well contented, and looked quite
calm when I saw him afterwards in the entry with a black hat on his
head and the white one in his hand.


--I think myself fortunate in having the Poet and the Professor for
my intimates.  We are so much together, that we no doubt think and
talk a good deal alike; yet our points of view are in many respects
individual and peculiar.  You know me well enough by this time.  I
have not talked with you so long for nothing and therefore I don't
think it necessary to draw my own portrait.  But let me say a word
or two about my friends.

The Professor considers himself, and I consider him, a very useful
and worthy kind of drudge.  I think he has a pride in his small
technicalities.  I know that he has a great idea of fidelity; and
though I suspect he laughs a little inwardly at times at the grand
airs "Science" puts on, as she stands marking time, but not getting
on, while the trumpets are blowing and the big drums beating,--yet
I am sure he has a liking for his specially, and a respect for its
cultivators.

But I'll tell you what the Professor said to the Poet the other
day.--My boy, said he, I can work a great deal cheaper than you,
because I keep all my goods in the lower story.  You have to hoist
yours into the upper chambers of the brain, and let them down again
to your customers.  I take mine in at the level of the ground, and
send them off from my doorstep almost without lifting.  I tell you,
the higher a man has to carry the raw material of thought before he
works it up, the more it costs him in blood, nerve, and muscle.
Coleridge knew all this very well when he advised every literary
man to have a profession.

--Sometimes I like to talk with one of them, and sometimes with the
other.  After a while I get tired of both.  When a fit of
intellectual disgust comes over me, I will tell you what I have
found admirable as a diversion, in addition to boating and other
amusements which I have spoken of,--that is, working at my
carpenter's-bench.  Some mechanical employment is the greatest
possible relief, after the purely intellectual faculties begin to
tire.  When I was quarantined once at Marseilles, I got to work
immediately at carving a wooden wonder of loose rings on a stick,
and got so interested in it, that when we were set loose, I
"regained my freedom with a sigh," because my toy was unfinished.

There are long seasons when I talk only with the Professor, and
others when I give myself wholly up to the Poet.  Now that my
winter's work is over and spring is with us, I feel naturally drawn
to the Poet's company.  I don't know anybody more alive to life
than he is.  The passion of poetry seizes on him every spring, he
says,--yet oftentimes he complains, that, when he feels most, he
can sing least.

Then a fit of despondency comes over him.--I feel ashamed,
sometimes,--said he, the other day,--to think how far my worst
songs fall below my best.  It sometimes seems to me, as I know it
does to others who have told me so, that they ought to be ALL
BEST,--if not in actual execution, at least in plan and motive.  I
am grateful--he continued--for all such criticisms.  A man is
always pleased to have his most serious efforts praised, and the
highest aspect of his nature get the most sunshine.

Yet I am sure, that, in the nature of things, many minds must
change their key now and then, on penalty of getting out of tune or
losing their voices.  You know, I suppose,--he said,--what is meant
by complementary colors?  You know the effect, too, which the
prolonged impression of any one color has on the retina.  If you
close your eyes after looking steadily at a RED object, you see a
GREEN image.

It is so with many minds,--I will not say with all.  After looking
at one aspect of external nature, or of any form of beauty or
truth, when they turn away, the COMPLEMENTARY aspect of the same
object stamps itself irresistibly and automatically upon the mind.
Shall they give expression to this secondary mental state, or not?

When I contemplate--said my friend, the Poet--the infinite
largeness of comprehension belonging to the Central Intelligence,
how remote the creative conception is from all scholastic and
ethical formulae, I am led to think that a healthy mind ought to
change its mood from time to time, and come down from its noblest
condition,--never, of course, to degrade itself by dwelling upon
what is itself debasing, but to let its lower faculties have a
chance to air and exercise themselves.  After the first and second
floor have been out in the bright street dressed in all their
splendors, shall not our humble friends in the basement have their
holiday, and the cotton velvet and the thin-skinned jewelry--simple
adornments, but befitting the station of those who wear them--show
themselves to the crowd, who think them beautiful, as they ought
to, though the people up stairs know that they are cheap and
perishable?

--I don't know that I may not bring the Poet here, some day or
other, and let him speak for himself.  Still I think I can tell you
what he says quite as well as he could do it.--Oh,--he said to me,
one day,--I am but a hand-organ man,--say rather, a hand-organ.
Life turns the winch, and fancy or accident pulls out the stops.  I
come under your windows, some fine spring morning, and play you one
of my adagio movements, and some of you say,--This is good,--play
us so always.  But, dear friends, if I did not change the stop
sometimes, the machine would wear out in one part and rust in
another.  How easily this or that tune flows!--you say,--there must
be no end of just such melodies in him.--I will open the poor
machine for you one moment, and you shall look.--Ah!  Every note
marks where a spur of steel has been driven in.  It is easy to
grind out the song, but to plant these bristling points which make
it was the painful task of time.

I don't like to say it,--he continued,--but poets commonly have no
larger stock of tunes than hand-organs; and when you hear them
piping up under your window, you know pretty well what to expect.
The more stops, the better.  Do let them all be pulled out in their
turn!

So spoke my friend, the Poet, and read me one of his stateliest
songs, and after it a gay chanson, and then a string of epigrams.
All true,--he said,--all flowers of his soul; only one with the
corolla spread, and another with its disk half opened, and the
third with the heart-leaves covered up and only a petal or two
showing its tip through the calyx.  The water-lily is the type of
the poet's soul,--he told me.

--What do you think, Sir,--said the divinity-student,--opens the
souls of poets most fully?

Why, there must be the internal force and the external stimulus.
Neither is enough by itself.  A rose will not flower in the dark,
and a fern will not flower anywhere.

What do I think is the true sunshine that opens the poet's
corolla?--I don't like to say.  They spoil a good many, I am
afraid; or at least they shine on a good many that never come to
anything.

Who are THEY?--said the schoolmistress.

Women.  Their love first inspires the poet, and their praise is his
best reward.

The schoolmistress reddened a little, but looked pleased.--Did I
really think so?--I do think so; I never feel safe until I have
pleased them; I don't think they are the first to see one's
defects, but they are the first to catch the color and fragrance of
a true poem.  Fit the same intellect to a man and it is a
bow-string,--to a woman and it is a harp-string.  She is vibratile and
resonant all over, so she stirs with slighter musical tremblings of
the air about her.--Ah, me!--said my friend, the Poet, to me, the
other day,--what color would it not have given to my thoughts, and
what thrice-washed whiteness to my words, had I been fed on women's
praises!  I should have grown like Marvell's fawn,--

"Lilies without; roses within!"

But then,--he added,--we all think, IF so and so, we should have
been this or that, as you were saying the other day, in those
rhymes of yours.

--I don't think there are many poets in the sense of creators; but
of those sensitive natures which reflect themselves naturally in
soft and melodious words, pleading for sympathy with their joys and
sorrows, every literature is full.  Nature carves with her own
hands the brain which holds the creative imagination, but she casts
the over-sensitive creatures in scores from the same mould.

There are two kinds of poets, just as there are two kinds of
blondes.  [Movement of curiosity among our ladies at table.--Please
to tell us about those blondes, said the schoolmistress.]  Why,
there are blondes who are such simply by deficiency of coloring
matter,--NEGATIVE or WASHED blondes, arrested by Nature on the way
to become albinesses.  There are others that are shot through with
golden light, with tawny or fulvous tinges in various degree,
--POSITIVE or STAINED blondes, dipped in yellow sunbeams, and as
unlike in their mode of being to the others as an orange is unlike
a snowball.  The albino-style carries with it a wide pupil and a
sensitive retina.  The other, or the leonine blonde, has an opaline
fire in her clear eye, which the brunette can hardly match with her
quick glittering glances.

Just so we have the great sun-kindled, constructive imaginations,
and a far more numerous class of poets who have a certain kind of
moonlight-genius given them to compensate for their imperfection of
nature.  Their want of mental coloring-matter makes them sensitive
to those impressions which stronger minds neglect or never feel at
all.  Many of them die young, and all of them are tinged with
melancholy.  There is no more beautiful illustration of the
principle of compensation which marks the Divine benevolence than
the fact that some of the holiest lives and some of the sweetest
songs are the growth of the infirmity which unfits its subject for
the rougher duties of life.  When one reads the life of Cowper, or
of Keats, or of Lucretia and Margaret Davidson,--of so many gentle,
sweet natures, born to weakness, and mostly dying before their
time,--one cannot help thinking that the human race dies out
singing, like the swan in the old story.  The French poet, Gilbert,
who died at the Hotel Dieu, at the age of twenty-nine,--(killed by
a key in his throat, which he had swallowed when delirious in
consequence of a fall,)--this poor fellow was a very good example
of the poet by excess of sensibility.  I found, the other day, that
some of my literary friends had never heard of him, though I
suppose few educated Frenchmen do not know the lines which he
wrote, a week before his death, upon a mean bed in the great
hospital of Paris.


"Au banquet de la vie, infortune convive,
J'apparus un jour, et je meurs;
Je meurs, et sur ma tombe, ou lentement j'arrive,
Nul ne viendra verser des pleurs."

At life's gay banquet placed, a poor unhappy guest,
One day I pass, then disappear;
I die, and on the tomb where I at length shall rest
No friend shall come to shed a tear.


You remember the same thing in other words some where in Kirke
White's poems.  It is the burden of the plaintive songs of all
these sweet albino-poets.  "I shall die and be forgotten, and the
world will go on just as if I had never been;--and yet how I have
loved! how I have longed! how I have aspired!"  And so singing,
their eyes grow brighter and brighter, and their features thinner
and thinner, until at last the veil of flesh is threadbare, and,
still singing, they drop it and pass onward.


--Our brains are seventy-year clocks.  The Angel of Life winds them
up once for all, then closes the case, and gives the key into the
hand of the Angel of the Resurrection.

Tic-tac! tic-tac! go the wheels of thought; our will cannot stop
them; they cannot stop themselves, sleep cannot still them; madness
only makes them go faster; death alone can break into the case,
and, seizing the ever-swinging pendulum, which we call the heart,
silence at last the clicking of the terrible escapement we have
carried so long beneath our wrinkled foreheads.

If we could only get at them, as we lie on our pillows and count
the dead beats of thought after thought and image after image
jarring through the overtired organ!  Will nobody block those
wheels, uncouple that pinion, cut the string that holds those
weights, blow up the infernal machine with gunpowder?  What a
passion comes over us sometimes for silence and rest!--that this
dreadful mechanism, unwinding the endless tapestry of time,
embroidered with spectral figures of life and death, could have but
one brief holiday!  Who can wonder that men swing themselves off
from beams in hempen lassos?--that they jump off from parapets into
the swift and gurgling waters beneath?--that they take counsel of
the grim friend who has but to utter his one peremptory
monosyllable and the restless machine is shivered as a vase that is
dashed upon a marble floor?  Under that building which we pass
every day there are strong dungeons, where neither hook, nor bar,
nor bed-cord, nor drinking-vessel from which a sharp fragment may
be shattered, shall by any chance be seen.  There is nothing for
it, when the brain is on fire with the whirling of its wheels, but
to spring against the stone wall and silence them with one crash.
Ah, they remembered that,--the kind city fathers,--and the walls
are nicely padded, so that one can take such exercise as he likes
without damaging himself on the very plain and serviceable
upholstery.  If anybody would only contrive some kind of a lever
that one could thrust in among the works of this horrid automaton
and check them, or alter their rate of going, what would the world
give for the discovery?

--From half a dime to a dime, according to the style of the place
and the quality of the liquor,--said the young fellow whom they
call John.

You speak trivially, but not unwisely,--I said.  Unless the will
maintain a certain control over these movements, which it cannot
stop, but can to some extent regulate, men are very apt to try to
get at the machine by some indirect system of leverage or other.
They clap on the brakes by means of opium; they change the
maddening monotony of the rhythm by means of fermented liquors.  It
is because the brain is locked up and we cannot touch its movement
directly, that we thrust these coarse tools in through any crevice,
by which they may reach the interior, and so alter its rate of
going for a while, and at last spoil the machine.

Men who exercise chiefly those faculties of the mind which work
independently of the will,--poets and artists, for instance, who
follow their imagination in their creative moments, instead of
keeping it in hand as your logicians and practical men do with
their reasoning faculty,--such men are too apt to call in the
mechanical appliances to help them govern their intellects.

--He means they get drunk,--said the young fellow already alluded
to by name.

Do you think men of true genius are apt to indulge in the use of
inebriating fluids? said the divinity-student.

If you think you are strong enough to bear what I am going to say,
--I replied,--I will talk to you about this.  But mind, now, these
are the things that some foolish people call DANGEROUS subjects,
--as if these vices which burrow into people's souls, as the
Guinea-worm burrows into the naked feet of West-Indian slaves, would
be more mischievous when seen than out of sight.  Now the true way to
deal with those obstinate animals, which are a dozen feet long, some
of them, and no bigger than a horse hair, is to get a piece of silk
round their HEADS, and pull them out very cautiously.  If you only
break them off, they grow worse than ever, and sometimes kill the
person who has the misfortune to harbor one of them.  Whence it is
plain that the first thing to do is to find out where the head lies.

Just so of all the vices, and particularly of this vice of
intemperance.  What is the head of it, and where does it lie?  For
you may depend upon it, there is not one of these vices that has
not a head of its own,--an intelligence,--a meaning,--a certain
virtue, I was going to say,--but that might, perhaps, sound
paradoxical.  I have heard an immense number of moral physicians
lay down the treatment of moral Guinea-worms, and the vast majority
of them would always insist that the creature had no head at all,
but was all body and tail.  So I have found a very common result of
their method to be that the string slipped, or that a piece only of
the creature was broken off, and the worm soon grew again, as bad
as ever.  The truth is, if the Devil could only appear in church by
attorney, and make the best statement that the facts would bear him
out in doing on behalf of his special virtues, (what we commonly
call vices,) the influence of good teachers would be much greater
than it is.  For the arguments by which the Devil prevails are
precisely the ones that the Devil-queller most rarely answers.  The
way to argue down a vice is not to tell lies about it,--to say that
it has no attractions, when everybody knows that it has,--but
rather to let it make out its case just as it certainly will in the
moment of temptation, and then meet it with the weapons furnished
by the Divine armory.  Ithuriel did not spit the toad on his spear,
you remember, but touched him with it, and the blasted angel took
the sad glories of his true shape.  If he had shown fight then, the
fair spirits would have known how to deal with him.

That all spasmodic cerebral action is an evil is not perfectly
clear.  Men get fairly intoxicated with music, with poetry, with
religious excitement, oftenest with love.  Ninon de l'Enclos said
she was so easily excited that her soup intoxicated her, and
convalescents have been made tipsy by a beef-steak.

There are forms and stages of alcoholic exaltation which, in
themselves, and without regard to their consequences, might be
considered as positive improvements of the persons affected.  When
the sluggish intellect is roused, the slow speech quickened, the
cold nature warmed, the latent sympathy developed, the flagging
spirit kindled,--before the trains of thought become confused or
the will perverted, or the muscles relaxed,--just at the moment
when the whole human zoophyte flowers out like a full-blown rose,
and is ripe for the subscription-paper or the contribution-box,--it
would be hard to say that a man was, at that very time, worse, or
less to be loved, than when driving a hard bargain with all his
meaner wits about him.  The difficulty is, that the alcoholic
virtues don't wash; but until the water takes their colors out, the
tints are very much like those of the true celestial stuff.

[Here I was interrupted by a question which I am very unwilling to
report, but have confidence enough in those friends who examine
these records to commit to their candor.

A PERSON at table asked me whether I "went in for rum as a steady
drink?"--His manner made the question highly offensive, but I
restrained myself, and answered thus:-]

Rum I take to be the name which unwashed moralists apply alike to
the product distilled from molasses and the noblest juices of the
vineyard.  Burgundy "in all its sunset glow" is rum.  Champagne,
"the foaming wine of Eastern France," in rum.  Hock, which our
friend, the Poet, speaks of as


"The Rhine's breastmilk, gushing cold and bright,
Pale as the moon, and maddening as her light,"


is rum.  Sir, I repudiate the loathsome vulgarism as an insult to
the first miracle wrought by the Founder of our religion!  I
address myself to the company.--I believe in temperance, nay,
almost in abstinence, as a rule for healthy people.  I trust that I
practice both.  But let me tell you, there are companies of men of
genius into which I sometimes go, where the atmosphere of intellect
and sentiment is so much more stimulating than alcohol, that, if I
thought fit to take wine, it would be to keep me sober.

Among the gentlemen that I have known, few, if any, were ruined by
drinking.  My few drunken acquaintances were generally ruined
before they became drunkards.  The habit of drinking is often a
vice, no doubt,--sometimes a misfortune,--as when an almost
irresistible hereditary propensity exists to indulge in it,--but
oftenest of all a PUNISHMENT.

Empty heads,--heads without ideas in wholesome variety and
sufficient number to furnish food for the mental clockwork,
--ill-regulated heads, where the faculties are not under the control
of the will,--these are the ones that hold the brains which their
owners are so apt to tamper with, by introducing the appliances we
have been talking about.  Now, when a gentleman's brain is empty or
ill-regulated, it is, to a great extent, his own fault; and so it
is simple retribution, that, while he lies slothfully sleeping or
aimlessly dreaming, the fatal habit settles on him like a vampyre,
and sucks his blood, fanning him all the while with its hot wings
into deeper slumber or idler dreams!  I am not such a hard-souled
being as to apply this to the neglected poor, who have had no
chance to fill their heads with wholesome ideas, and to be taught
the lesson of self-government.  I trust the tariff of Heaven has an
ad valorem scale for them--and all of us.

But to come back to poets and artists;--if they really are more
prone to the abuse of stimulants,--and I fear that this is true,
--the reason of it is only too clear.  A man abandons himself to a
fine frenzy, and the power which flows through him, as I once
explained to you, makes him the medium of a great poem or a great
picture.  The creative action is not voluntary at all, but
automatic; we can only put the mind into the proper attitude, and
wait for the wind, that blows where it listeth, to breathe over it.
Thus the true state of creative genius is allied to reverie, or
dreaming.  If mind and body were both healthy and had food enough
and fair play, I doubt whether any men would be more temperate than
the imaginative classes.  But body and mind often flag,--perhaps
they are ill-made to begin with, underfed with bread or ideas,
overworked, or abused in some way.  The automatic action, by which
genius wrought its wonders, fails.  There is only one thing which
can rouse the machine; not will,--that cannot reach it; nothing but
a ruinous agent, which hurries the wheels awhile and soon eats out
the heart of the mechanism.  The dreaming faculties are always the
dangerous ones, because their mode of action can be imitated by
artificial excitement; the reasoning ones are safe, because they
imply continued voluntary effort.

I think you will find it true, that, before any vice can fasten on
a man, body, mind, or moral nature must be debilitated.  The mosses
and fungi gather on sickly trees, not thriving ones; and the odious
parasites which fasten on the human frame choose that which is
already enfeebled.  Mr. Walker, the hygeian humorist, declared that
he had such a healthy skin it was impossible for any impurity to
stick to it, and maintained that it was an absurdity to wash a face
which was of necessity always clean.  I don't know how much fancy
there was in this; but there is no fancy in saying that the
lassitude of tired-out operatives, and the languor of imaginative
natures in their periods of collapse, and the vacuity of minds
untrained to labor and discipline, fit the soul and body for the
germination of the seeds of intemperance.

Whenever the wandering demon of Drunkenness finds a ship adrift,
--no steady wind in its sails, no thoughtful pilot directing its
course,--he steps on board, takes the helm, and steers straight for
the maelstrom.


--I wonder if you know the TERRIBLE SMILE?  [The young fellow whom
they call John winked very hard, and made a jocular remark, the
sense of which seemed to depend on some double meaning of the word
SMILE.  The company was curious to know what I meant.]

There are persons--I said--who no sooner come within sight of you
than they begin to smile, with an uncertain movement of the mouth,
which conveys the idea that they are thinking about themselves, and
thinking, too, that you are thinking they are thinking about
themselves,--and so look at you with a wretched mixture of
self-consciousness, awkwardness, and attempts to carry off both,
which are betrayed by the cowardly behaviour of the eye and the
tell-tale weakness of the lips that characterize these unfortunate
beings.

--Why do you call them unfortunate, Sir?--asked the divinity-
student.

Because it is evident that the consciousness of some imbecility or
other is at the bottom of this extraordinary expression.  I don't
think, however, that these persons are commonly fools.  I have
known a number, and all of them were intelligent.  I think nothing
conveys the idea of UNDERBREEDING more than this self-betraying
smile.  Yet I think this peculiar habit as well as that of
MEANINGLESS BLUSHING may be fallen into by very good people who met
often, or sit opposite each other at table.  A true gentleman's
face is infinitely removed from all such paltriness,--calm-eyed,
firm-mouthed.  I think Titian understood the look of a gentleman as
well as anybody that ever lived.  The portrait of a young man
holding a glove in his hand, in the Gallery of the Louvre, if any
of you have seen that collection, will remind you of what I mean.

--Do I think these people know the peculiar look they have?--I
cannot say; I hope not; I am afraid they would never forgive me, if
they did.  The worst of it is, the trick is catching; when one
meets one of these fellows, he feels a tendency to the same
manifestation.  The Professor tells me there is a muscular slip, a
dependence of the platysma myoides, which is called the risorius
Santorini.

--Say that once more,--exclaimed the young fellow mentioned above.

The Professor says there is a little fleshy slip called Santorini's
laughing muscle.  I would have it cut out of my face, if I were
born with one of those constitutional grins upon it.  Perhaps I am
uncharitable in my judgment of those sour-looking people I told you
of the other day, and of these smiling folks.  It may be that they
are born with these looks, as other people are with more generally
recognized deformities.  Both are bad enough, but I had rather meet
three of the scowlers than one of the smilers.

--There is another unfortunate way of looking, which is peculiar to
that amiable sex we do not like to find fault with.  There are some
very pretty, but, unhappily, very ill-bred women, who don't
understand the law of the road with regard to handsome faces.
Nature and custom would, no doubt, agree in conceding to all males
the right of at least two distinct looks at every comely female
countenance, without any infraction of the rules of courtesy or the
sentiment of respect.  The first look is necessary to define the
person of the individual one meets so as to avoid it in passing.
Any unusual attraction detected in a first glance is a sufficient
apology for a second,--not a prolonged and impertinent stare, but
an appreciating homage of the eyes, such as a stranger may
inoffensively yield to a passing image.  It is astonishing how
morbidly sensitive some vulgar beauties are to the slightest
demonstration of this kind.  When a lady walks the streets, she
leaves her virtuous-indignation countenance at home; she knows well
enough that the street is a picture-gallery, where pretty faces
framed in pretty bonnets are meant to be seen, and everybody has a
right to see them.

--When we observe how the same features and style of person and
character descend from generation to generation, we can believe
that some inherited weakness may account for these peculiarities.
Little snapping-turtles snap--so the great naturalist tells us
--before they are out of the egg-shell.  I am satisfied, that, much
higher up in the scale of life, character is distinctly shown at
the age of--2 or--3 months.

--My friend, the Professor, has been full of eggs lately.  [This
remark excited a burst of hilarity which I did not allow to
interrupt the course of my observations.]  He has been reading the
great book where he found the fact about the little snapping-
turtles mentioned above.  Some of the things he has told me have
suggested several odd analogies enough.

There are half a dozen men, or so, who carry in their brains the
OVARIAN EGGS of the next generation's or century's civilization.
These eggs are not ready to be laid in the form of books as yet;
some of them are hardly ready to be put into the form of talk.  But
as rudimentary ideas or inchoate tendencies, there they are; and
these are what must form the future.  A man's general notions are
not good for much, unless he has a crop of these intellectual
ovarian eggs in his own brain, or knows them as they exist in the
minds of others.  One must be in the HABIT of talking with such
persons to get at these rudimentary germs of thought; for their
development is necessarily imperfect, and they are moulded on new
patterns, which must be long and closely studied.  But these are
the men to talk with.  No fresh truth ever gets into a book.

--A good many fresh lies get in, anyhow,--said one of the company.

I proceeded in spite of the interruption.--All uttered thought, my
friend, the Professor, says, is of the nature of an excretion.  Its
materials have been taken in, and have acted upon the system, and
been reacted on by it; it has circulated and done its office in one
mind before it is given out for the benefit of others.  It may be
milk or venom to other minds; but, in either case, it is something
which the producer has had the use of and can part with.  A man
instinctively tries to get rid of his thought in conversation or in
print so soon as it is matured; but it is hard to get at it as it
lies imbedded, a mere potentiality, the germ of a germ, in his
intellect.

--Where are the brains that are fullest of these ovarian eggs of
thought?--I decline mentioning individuals.  The producers of
thought, who are few, the "jobbers" of thought, who are many, and
the retailers of thought, who are numberless, are so mixed up in
the popular apprehension, that it would be hopeless to try to
separate them before opinion has had time to settle.  Follow the
course of opinion on the great subjects of human interest for a few
generations or centuries, get its parallax, map out a small arc of
its movement, see where it tends, and then see who is in advance of
it or even with it; the world calls him hard names, probably; but
if you would find the ova of the future, you must look into the
folds of his cerebral convolutions.

[The divinity-student looked a little puzzled at this suggestion,
as if he did not see exactly where he was to come out, if he
computed his arc too nicely.  I think it possible it might cut off
a few corners of his present belief, as it has cut off martyr-
burning and witch-hanging;--but time will show,--time will show, as
the old gentleman opposite says.]

--Oh,--here is that copy of verses I told you about.


SPRING HAS COME.

Intra Muros.

The sunbeams, lost for half a year,
Slant through my pane their morning rays
For dry Northwesters cold and clear,
The East blows in its thin blue haze.

And first the snowdrop's bells are seen,
Then close against the sheltering wall
The tulip's horn of dusky green,
The peony's dark unfolding ball.

The golden-chaliced crocus burns;
The long narcissus-blades appear;
The cone-beaked hyacinth returns,
And lights her blue-flamed chandelier.

The willow's whistling lashes, wrung
By the wild winds of gusty March,
With sallow leaflets lightly strung,
Are swaying by the tufted larch.

The elms have robed their slender spray
With full-blown flower and embryo leaf;
Wide o'er the clasping arch of day
Soars like a cloud their hoary chief.

--[See the proud tulip's flaunting cup,
That flames in glory for an hour,--
Behold it withering,--then look up,--
How meek the forest-monarch's flower!--

When wake the violets, Winter dies;
When sprout the elm-buds, Spring is near;
When lilacs blossom, Summer cries,
"Bud, little roses!  Spring is here!"]

The windows blush with fresh bouquets,
Cut with the May-dew on their lips;
The radish all its bloom displays,
Pink as Aurora's finger-tips.

Nor less the flood of light that showers
On beauty's changed corolla-shades,--
The walks are gay as bridal bowers
With rows of many-petalled maids.

The scarlet shell-fish click and clash
In the blue barrow where they slide;
The horseman, proud of streak and splash,
Creeps homeward from his morning ride.

Here comes the dealer's awkward string,
With neck in rope and tail in knot,--
Rough colts, with careless country-swing,
In lazy walk or slouching trot.

--Wild filly from the mountain-side,
Doomed to the close and chafing thills,
Lend me thy long, untiring stride
To seek with thee thy western hills!

I hear the whispering voice of Spring,
The thrush's trill, the cat-bird's cry,
Like some poor bird with prisoned wing
That sits and sings, but longs to fly.

Oh for one spot of living green,--
One little spot where leaves can grow,--
To love unblamed, to walk unseen,
To dream above, to sleep below!



CHAPTER IX



[Aqui esta encerrada el alma del licenciado Pedro Garcias.

If I should ever make a little book out of these papers, which I
hope you are not getting tired of, I suppose I ought to save the
above sentence for a motto on the title-page.  But I want it now,
and must use it.  I need not say to you that the words are Spanish,
nor that they are to be found in the short Introduction to "Gil
Blas," nor that they mean, "Here lies buried the soul of the
licentiate Pedro Garcias."

I warned all young people off the premises when I began my notes
referring to old age.  I must be equally fair with old people now.
They are earnestly requested to leave this paper to young persons
from the age of twelve to that of fourscore years and ten, at which
latter period of life I am sure that I shall have at least one
youthful reader.  You know well enough what I mean by youth and
age;--something in the soul, which has no more to do with the color
of the hair than the vein of gold in a rock has to do with the
grass a thousand feet above it.

I am growing bolder as I write.  I think it requires not only
youth, but genius, to read this paper.  I don't mean to imply that
it required any whatsoever to talk what I have here written down.
It did demand a certain amount of memory, and such command of the
English tongue as is given by a common school education.  So much I
do claim.  But here I have related, at length, a string of
trivialities.  You must have the imagination of a poet to
transfigure them.  These little colored patches are stains upon the
windows of a human soul; stand on the outside, they are but dull
and meaningless spots of color; seen from within, they are
glorified shapes with empurpled wings and sunbright aureoles.

My hand trembles when I offer you this.  Many times I have come
bearing flowers such as my garden grew; but now I offer you this
poor, brown, homely growth, you may cast it away as worthless.
And yet--and yet--it is something better than flowers; it is a
SEED-CAPSULE.  Many a gardener will cut you a bouquet of his choicest
blossoms for small fee, but he does not love to let the seeds of
his rarest varieties go out of his own hands.

It is by little things that we know ourselves; a soul would very
probably mistake itself for another, when once disembodied, were it
not for individual experiences which differ from those of others
only in details seemingly trifling.  All of us have been thirsty
thousands of times, and felt, with Pindar, that water was the best
of things.  I alone, as I think, of all mankind, remember one
particular pailful of water, flavored with the white-pine of which
the pail was made, and the brown mug out of which one Edmund, a
red-faced and curly-haired boy, was averred to have bitten a
fragment in his haste to drink; it being then high summer, and
little full-blooded boys feeling very warm and porous in the
low-"studded" school-room where Dame Prentiss, dead and gone, ruled
over young children, many of whom are old ghosts now, and have
known Abraham for twenty or thirty years of our mortal time.

Thirst belongs to humanity, everywhere, in all ages; but that
white-pine pail, and that brown mug belong to me in particular; and
just so of my special relationships with other things and with my
rice.  One could never remember himself in eternity by the mere
fact of having loved or hated any more than by that of having
thirsted; love and hate have no more individuality in them than
single waves in the ocean;--but the accidents or trivial marks
which distinguished those whom we loved or hated make their memory
our own forever, and with it that of our own personality also.

Therefore, my aged friend of five-and-twenty, or thereabouts, pause
at the threshold of this particular record, and ask yourself
seriously whether you are fit to read such revelations as are to
follow.  For observe, you have here no splendid array of petals
such as poets offer you,--nothing but a dry shell, containing, if
you will get out what is in it, a few small seeds of poems.  You
may laugh at them, if you like.  I shall never tell you what I
think of you for so doing.  But if you can read into the heart of
these things, in the light of other memories as slight, yet as dear
to your soul, then you are neither more nor less than a POET, and
can afford to write no more verses during the rest of your natural
life,--which abstinence I take to be one of the surest marks of
your meriting the divine name I have just bestowed upon you.

May I beg of you who have begun this paper nobly trusting to your
own imagination and sensibilities to give it the significance which
it does not lay claim to without your kind assistance,--may I beg
of you, I say, to pay particular attention to the BRACKETS which
enclose certain paragraphs?  I want my "asides," you see, to
whisper loud to you who read my notes, and sometimes I talk a page
or two to you without pretending that I said a word of it to our
boarders.  You will find a very long "aside" to you almost as soon
as you begin to read.  And so, dear young friend, fall to at once,
taking such things as I have provided for you; and if you turn
them, by the aid of your powerful imagination, into a fair banquet,
why, then, peace be with you, and a summer by the still waters of
some quiet river, or by some yellow beach, where, as my friend the
Professor, says, you can sit with Nature's wrist in your hand and
count her ocean-pulses.]

I should like to make a few intimate revelations relating
especially to my early life, if I thought you would like to hear
them.

[The schoolmistress turned a little in her chair, and sat with her
face directed partly towards me.--Half-mourning now;--purple
ribbon.  That breastpin she wears has GRAY hair in it; her
mother's, no doubt;--I remember our landlady's daughter telling me,
soon after the schoolmistress came to board with us, that she had
lately "buried a payrent."  That's what made her look so pale,
--kept the poor dying thing alive with her own blood.  Ah! long
illness is the real vampyrism; think of living a year or two after
one is dead, by sucking the life-blood out of a frail young
creature at one's bedside!  Well, souls grow white, as well as
cheeks, in these holy duties one that goes in a nurse may come out
an angel.--God bless all good women!--to their soft hands and
pitying hearts we must all come at last!--The schoolmistress has a
better color than when she came.--Too late!  "It might have been."
--Amen!--How many thoughts go to a dozen heart-beats, sometimes!
There was no long pause after my remark addressed to the company,
but in that time I had the train of ideas and feelings I have just
given flash through my consciousness sudden and sharp as the
crooked red streak that springs out of its black sheath like the
creese of a Malay in his death-race, and stabs the earth right and
left in its blind rage.

I don't deny that there was a pang in it,--yes, a stab; but there
was a prayer, too,--the "Amen" belonged to that.--Also, a vision of
a four-story brick house, nicely furnished,--I actually saw many
specific articles,--curtains, sofas, tables, and others, and could
draw the patterns of them at this moment,--a brick house, I say,
looking out on the water, with a fair parlor, and books and busts
and pots of flowers and bird-cages, all complete; and at the
window, looking on the water, two of us.--"Male and female created
He them."--These two were standing at the window, when a smaller
shape that was playing near them looked up at me with such a look
that I----poured out a glass of water, drank it all down, and then
continued.]

I said I should like to tell you some things, such as people
commonly never tell, about my early recollections.  Should you like
to hear them?

Should we LIKE to hear them?--said the schoolmistress;--no, but we
should love to.

[The voice was a sweet one, naturally, and had something very
pleasant in its tone, just then.--The four-story brick house, which
had gone out like a transparency when the light behind it is
quenched, glimmered again for a moment; parlor, books, busts,
flower-pots, bird-cages, all complete,--and the figures as before.]

We are waiting with eagerness, Sir,--said the divinity-student.

[The transparency went out as if a flash of black lightning had
struck it.]

If you want to hear my confessions, the next thing--I said--is to
know whether I can trust you with them.  It is only fair to say
that there are a great many people in the world that laugh at such
things.  _I_ think they are fools, but perhaps you don't all agree
with me.

Here are children of tender age talked to as if they were capable
of understanding Calvin's "Institutes," and nobody has honesty or
sense enough to tell the plain truth about the little wretches:
that they are as superstitious as naked savages, and such miserable
spiritual cowards--that is, if they have any imagination--that they
will believe anything which is taught them, and a great deal more
which they teach themselves.

I was born and bred, as I have told you twenty times, among books
and those who knew what was in books.  I was carefully instructed
in things temporal and spiritual.  But up to a considerable
maturity of childhood I believed Raphael and Michael Angelo to have
been superhuman beings.  The central doctrine of the prevalent
religious faith of Christendom was utterly confused and neutralized
in my mind for years by one of those too common stories of actual
life, which I overheard repeated in a whisper.--Why did I not ask?
you will say.--You don't remember the rosy pudency of sensitive
children.  The first instinctive movement of the little creatures
is to make a cache, and bury in it beliefs, doubts, dreams, hopes,
and terrors.  I am uncovering one of these CACHES.  Do you think I
was necessarily a greater fool and coward than another?

I was afraid of ships.  Why, I could never tell.  The masts looked
frightfully tall,--but they were not so tall as the steeple of our
old yellow meeting-house.  At any rate I used to hide my eyes from
the sloops and schooners that were wont to lie at the end of the
bridge, and I confess that traces of this undefined terror lasted
very long.--One other source of alarm had a still more fearful
significance.  There was a great wooden HAND,--a glove-maker's
sign, which used to swing and creak in the blast, as it hung from a
pillar before a certain shop a mile or two outside of the city.
Oh, the dreadful hand!  Always hanging there ready to catch up a
little boy, who would come home to supper no more, nor yet to bed,
--whose porringer would be laid away empty thenceforth, and his
half-worn shoes wait until his small brother grew to fit them.

As for all manner of superstitious observances, I used once to
think I must have been peculiar in having such a list of them, but
I now believe that half the children of the same age go through the
same experiences.  No Roman soothsayer ever had such a catalogue of
OMENS as I found in the Sibylline leaves of my childhood.  That
trick of throwing a stone at a tree and attaching some mighty issue
to hitting or missing, which you will find mentioned in one or more
biographies, I well remember.  Stepping on or over certain
particular things or spots--Dr. Johnson's especial weakness I got
the habit of at a very early age.--I won't swear that I have not
some tendency to these not wise practices even at this present
date.  [How many of you that read these notes can say the same
thing!]

With these follies mingled sweet delusions, which I loved so well I
would not outgrow them, even when it required a voluntary effort to
put a momentary trust in them.  Here is one which I cannot help
telling you.

The firing of the great guns at the Navy-yard is easily heard at
the place where I was born and lived.  "There is a ship of war come
in," they used to say, when they heard them.  Of course, I supposed
that such vessels came in unexpectedly, after indefinite years of
absence,--suddenly as falling stones; and that the great guns
roared in their astonishment and delight at the sight of the old
war-ship splitting the bay with her cutwater.  Now, the sloop-of-
war the Wasp, Captain Blakely, after gloriously capturing the
Reindeer and the Avon, had disappeared from the face of the ocean,
and was supposed to be lost.  But there was no proof of it, and, of
course, for a time, hopes were entertained that she might be heard
from.  Long after the last real chance had utterly vanished, I
pleased myself with the fond illusion that somewhere on the waste
of waters she was still floating, and there were YEARS during which
I never heard the sound of the great guns booming inland from the
Navy-yard without saying to myself, "The Wasp has come!" and almost
thinking I could see her, as she rolled in, crumpling the water
before her, weather-beaten, barnacled, with shattered spars and
threadbare canvas, welcomed by the shouts and tears of thousands.
This was one of those dreams that I nursed and never told.  Let me
make a clean breast of it now, and say, that, so late as to have
outgrown childhood, perhaps to have got far on towards manhood,
when the roar of the cannon has struck suddenly on my ear, I have
started with a thrill of vague expectation and tremulous delight,
and the long-unspoken words have articulated themselves in the
mind's dumb whisper, THE WASP HAS COME!

--Yes, children believe plenty of queer things.  I suppose all of
you have had the pocket-book fever when you were little?--What do I
mean?  Why, ripping up old pocket-books in the firm belief that
bank-bills to an immense amount were hidden in them.--So, too, you
must all remember some splendid unfulfilled promise of somebody or
other, which fed you with hopes perhaps for years, and which left a
blank in your life which nothing has ever filled up.--O. T. quitted
our household carrying with him the passionate regrets of the more
youthful members.  He was an ingenious youngster; wrote wonderful
copies, and carved the two initials given above with great skill on
all available surfaces.  I thought, by the way, they were all gone;
but the other day I found them on a certain door which I will show
you some time.  How it surprised me to find them so near the
ground!  I had thought the boy of no trivial dimensions.  Well, O.
T., when he went, made a solemn promise to two of us.  I was to
have a ship, and the other a marTIN-house (last syllable pronounced
as in the word TIN).  Neither ever came; but, oh, how many and many
a time I have stolen to the corner,--the cars pass close by it at
this time,--and looked up that long avenue, thinking that he must
be coming now, almost sure, as I turned to look northward, that
there he would be, trudging toward me, the ship in one hand and the
marTIN-house in the other!

[You must not suppose that all I am going to say, as well as all I
have said, was told to the whole company.  The young fellow whom
they call John was in the yard, sitting on a barrel and smoking a
cheroot, the fumes of which came in, not ungrateful, through the
open window.  The divinity-student disappeared in the midst of our
talk.  The poor relation in black bombazine, who looked and moved
as if all her articulations were elbow-joints, had gone off to her
chamber, after waiting with a look of soul-subduing decorum at the
foot of the stairs until one of the male sort had passed her and
ascended into the upper regions.  This is a famous point of
etiquette in our boarding-house; in fact, between ourselves, they
make such an awful fuss about it, that I, for one, had a great deal
rather have them simple enough not to think of such matters at all.
Our landlady's daughter said, the other evening, that she was going
to "retire"; whereupon the young fellow called John took up a lamp
and insisted on lighting her to the foot of the staircase.  Nothing
would induce her to pass by him, until the schoolmistress, saying
in good plain English that it was her bed-time, walked straight by
them both, not seeming to trouble herself about either of them.

I have been led away from what I meant the portion included in
these brackets to inform my readers about.  I say, then, most of
the boarders had left the table about the time when I began telling
some of these secrets of mine,--all of them, in fact, but the old
gentleman opposite and the schoolmistress.  I understand why a
young woman should like to hear these simple but genuine
experiences of early life, which are, as I have said, the little
brown seeds of what may yet grow to be poems with leaves of azure
and gold; but when the old gentleman pushed up his chair nearer to
me, and slanted round his best ear, and once, when I was speaking
of some trifling, tender reminiscence, drew a long breath, with
such a tremor in it that a little more and it would have been a
sob, why, then I felt there must be something of nature in them
which redeemed their seeming insignificance.  Tell me, man or woman
with whom I am whispering, have you not a small store of
recollections, such as these I am uncovering, buried beneath the
dead leaves of many summers, perhaps under the unmelting snows of
fast-returning winters,--a few such recollections, which, if you
should write them all out, would be swept into some careless
editor's drawer, and might cost a scanty half-hour's lazy reading
to his subscribers,--and yet, if Death should cheat you of them,
you would not know yourself in eternity?]

--I made three acquaintances at a very early period of life, my
introduction to whom was never forgotten.  The first unequivocal
act of wrong that has left its trace in my memory was this:
refusing a small favor asked of me,--nothing more than telling what
had happened at school one morning.  No matter who asked it; but
there were circumstances which saddened and awed me.  I had no
heart to speak;--I faltered some miserable, perhaps petulant
excuse, stole away, and the first battle of life was lost.  What
remorse followed I need not tell.  Then and there, to the best of
my knowledge, I first consciously took Sin by the hand and turned
my back on Duty.  Time has led me to look upon my offence more
leniently; I do not believe it or any other childish wrong is
infinite, as some have pretended, but infinitely finite.  Yet, oh
if I had but won that battle!

The great Destroyer, whose awful shadow it was that had silenced
me, came near me,--but never, so as to be distinctly seen and
remembered, during my tender years.  There flits dimly before me
the image of a little girl, whose name even I have forgotten, a
schoolmate, whom we missed one day, and were told that she had
died.  But what death was I never had any very distinct idea, until
one day I climbed the low stone wall of the old burial-ground and
mingled with a group that were looking into a very deep, long,
narrow hole, dug down through the green sod, down through the brown
loam, down through the yellow gravel, and there at the bottom was
an oblong red box, and a still, sharp, white face of a young man
seen through an opening at one end of it.  When the lid was closed,
and the gravel and stones rattled down pell-mell, and the woman in
black, who was crying and wringing her hands, went off with the
other mourners, and left him, then I felt that I had seen Death,
and should never forget him.

One other acquaintance I made at an earlier period of life than the
habit of romancers authorizes.--Love, of course.--She was a famous
beauty afterwards.--I am satisfied that many children rehearse
their parts in the drama of life before they have shed all their
milk-teeth.--I think I won't tell the story of the golden blonde.
--I suppose everybody has had his childish fancies; but sometimes
they are passionate impulses, which anticipate all the tremulous
emotions belonging to a later period.  Most children remember
seeing and adoring an angel before they were a dozen years old.

[The old gentleman had left his chair opposite and taken a seat by
the schoolmistress and myself, a little way from the table.--It's
true, it's true,--said the old gentleman.--He took hold of a steel
watch-chain, which carried a large, square gold key at one end and
was supposed to have some kind of time-keeper at the other.  With
some trouble he dragged up an ancient-looking, thick, silver,
bull's-eye watch.  He looked at it for a moment,--hesitated,
--touched the inner corner of his right eye with the pulp of his
middle finger,--looked at the face of the watch,--said it was
getting into the forenoon,--then opened the watch and handed me the
loose outside case without a word.--The watch-paper had been pink
once, and had a faint tinge still, as if all its tender life had
not yet quite faded out.  Two little birds, a flower, and, in small
school-girl letters, a date,--17 . .--no matter.--Before I was
thirteen years old,--said the old gentleman.--I don't know what was
in that young schoolmistress's head, nor why she should have done
it; but she took out the watch-paper and put it softly to her lips,
as if she were kissing the poor thing that made it so long ago.
The old gentleman took the watch-paper carefully from her, replaced
it, turned away and walked out, holding the watch in his hand.  I
saw him pass the window a moment after with that foolish white hat
on his head; he couldn't have been thinking what he was about when
he put it on.  So the schoolmistress and I were left alone.  I drew
my chair a shade nearer to her, and continued.]

And since I am talking of early recollections, I don't know why I
shouldn't mention some others that still cling to me,--not that you
will attach any very particular meaning to these same images so
full of significance to me, but that you will find something
parallel to them in your own memory.  You remember, perhaps, what I
said one day about smells.  There were certain SOUNDS also which
had a mysterious suggestiveness to me,--not so intense, perhaps, as
that connected with the other sense, but yet peculiar, and never to
be forgotten.

The first was the creaking of the wood-sleds, bringing their loads
of oak and walnut from the country, as the slow-swinging oxen
trailed them along over the complaining snow, in the cold, brown
light of early morning.  Lying in bed and listening to their dreary
music had a pleasure in it akin to the Lucretian luxury, or that
which Byron speaks of as to be enjoyed in looking on at a battle by
one "who hath no friend, no brother there."

There was another sound, in itself so sweet, and so connected with
one of those simple and curious superstitions of childhood of which
I have spoken, that I can never cease to cherish a sad sort of love
for it.--Let me tell the superstitious fancy first.  The Puritan
"Sabbath," as everybody knows, began at "sundown" on Saturday
evening.  To such observance of it I was born and bred.  As the
large, round disk of day declined, a stillness, a solemnity, a
somewhat melancholy hush came over us all.  It was time for work to
cease, and for playthings to be put away.  The world of active life
passed into the shadow of an eclipse, not to emerge until the sun
should sink again beneath the horizon.

It was in this stillness of the world without and of the soul
within that the pulsating lullaby of the evening crickets used to
make itself most distinctly heard,--so that I well remember I used
to think that the purring of these little creatures, which mingled
with the batrachian hymns from the neighboring swamp, WAS PECULIAR
TO SATURDAY EVENINGS.  I don't know that anything could give a
clearer idea of the quieting and subduing effect of the old habit
of observance of what was considered holy time, than this strange,
childish fancy.

Yes, and there was still another sound which mingled its solemn
cadences with the waking and sleeping dreams of my boyhood.  It was
heard only at times,--a deep, muffled roar, which rose and fell,
not loud, but vast,--a whistling boy would have drowned it for his
next neighbor, but it must have been heard over the space of a
hundred square miles.  I used to wonder what this might be.  Could
it be the roar of the thousand wheels and the ten thousand
footsteps jarring and trampling along the stones of the neighboring
city?  That would be continuous; but this, as I have said, rose and
fell in regular rhythm.  I remember being told, and I suppose this
to have been the true solution, that it was the sound of the waves,
after a high wind, breaking on the long beaches many miles distant.
I should really like to know whether any observing people living
ten miles, more or less, inland from long beaches,--in such a town,
for instance, as Cantabridge, in the eastern part of the Territory
of the Massachusetts,--have ever observed any such sound, and
whether it was rightly accounted for as above.

Mingling with these inarticulate sounds in the low murmur of
memory, are the echoes of certain voices I have heard at rare
intervals.  I grieve to say it, but our people, I think, have not
generally agreeable voices.  The marrowy organisms, with skins that
shed water like the backs of ducks, with smooth surfaces neatly
padded beneath, and velvet linings to their singing-pipes, are not
so common among us as that other pattern of humanity with angular
outlines and plane surfaces, and integuments, hair like the fibrous
covering of a cocoa-nut in gloss and suppleness as well as color,
and voices at once thin and strenuous,--acidulous enough to produce
effervescence with alkalis, and stridulous enough to sing duets
with the katydids.  I think our conversational soprano, as
sometimes overheard in the cars, arising from a group of young
persons, who may have taken the train at one of our great
industrial centres, for instance,--young persons of the female sex,
we will say, who have bustled in full-dressed, engaged in loud
strident speech, and who, after free discussion, have fixed on two
or more double seats, which having secured, they proceed to eat
apples and hand round daguerreotypes,--I say, I think the
conversational soprano, heard under these circumstances, would not
be among the allurements the old Enemy would put in requisition,
were he getting up a new temptation of St. Anthony.

There are sweet voices among us, we all know, and voices not
musical, it may be, to those who hear them for the first time, yet
sweeter to us than any we shall hear until we listen to some
warbling angel in the overture to that eternity of blissful
harmonies we hope to enjoy.--But why should I tell lies?  If my
friends love me, it is because I try to tell the truth.  I never
heard but two voices in my life that frightened me by their
sweetness.

--Frightened you?--said the schoolmistress.--Yes, frightened me.
They made me feel as if there might be constituted a creature with
such a chord in her voice to some string in another's soul, that,
if she but spoke, he would leave all and follow her, though it were
into the jaws of Erebus.  Our only chance to keep our wits is, that
there are so few natural chords between others' voices and this
string in our souls, and that those which at first may have jarred
a little by and by come into harmony with it.--But I tell you this
is no fiction.  You may call the story of Ulysses and the Sirens a
fable, but what will you say to Mario and the poor lady who
followed him?

--Whose were those two voices that bewitches me so?--They both
belonged to German women.  One was a chambermaid, not otherwise
fascinating.  The key of my room at a certain great hotel was
missing, and this Teutonic maiden was summoned to give information
respecting it.  The simple soul was evidently not long from her
mother-land, and spoke with sweet uncertainty of dialect.  But to
hear her wonder and lament and suggest, with soft, liquid
inflexions, and low, sad murmurs, in tones as full of serious
tenderness for the fate of the lost key as if it had been a child
that had strayed from its mother, was so winning, that, had her
features and figure been as delicious as her accents,--if she had
looked like the marble Clytie, for instance,--why, all can say is--

[The schoolmistress opened her eyes so wide, that I stopped short.]

I was only going to say that I should have drowned myself.  For
Lake Erie was close by, and it is so much better to accept
asphyxia, which takes only three minutes by the watch, than a
mesalliance, that lasts fifty years to begin with, and then passes
along down the line of descent, (breaking out in all manner of
boorish manifestations of feature and manner, which, if men were
only as short-lived as horses, could be readily traced back through
the square-roots and the cube-roots of the family stem on which you
have hung the armorial bearings of the De Champignons or the De la
Morues, until one came to beings that ate with knives and said
"Haow?") that no person of right feeling could have hesitated for a
single moment.

The second of the ravishing voices I have heard was, as I have
said, that of another German woman.--I suppose I shall ruin myself
by saying that such a voice could not have come from any
Americanized human being.

--What was there in it?--said the schoolmistress,--and, upon my
word, her tones were so very musical, that I almost wished I had
said three voices instead of two, and not made the unpatriotic
remark above reported.--Oh, I said, it had so much WOMAN in it,
--MULIEBRITY, as well as FEMINEITY;--no self-assertion, such as free
suffrage introduces into every word and movement; large, vigorous
nature, running back to those huge-limbed Germans of Tacitus, but
subdued by the reverential training and tuned by the kindly culture
of fifty generations.  Sharp business habits, a lean soil,
independence, enterprise, and east winds, are not the best things
for the larynx.  Still, you hear noble voices among us,--I have
known families famous for them,--but ask the first person you meet
a question, and ten to one there is a hard, sharp, metallic,
matter-of-business clink in the accents of the answer, that
produces the effect of one of those bells which small trades-people
connect with their shop-doors, and which spring upon your ear with
such vivacity, as you enter, that your first impulse is to retire
at once from the precincts.

--Ah, but I must not forget that dear little child I saw and heard
in a French hospital.  Between two and three years old.  Fell out
of her chair and snapped both thigh-bones.  Lying in bed, patient,
gentle.  Rough students round her, some in white aprons, looking
fearfully business-like; but the child placid, perfectly still.  I
spoke to her, and the blessed little creature answered me in a
voice of such heavenly sweetness, with that reedy thrill in it
which you have heard in the thrush's even-song, that I hear it at
this moment, while I am writing, so many, many years afterwards.
--C'est tout comme un serin, said the French student at my side.

These are the voices which struck the key-note of my conceptions as
to what the sounds we are to hear in heaven will be, if we shall
enter through one of the twelve gates of pearl.  There must be
other things besides aerolites that wander from their own spheres
to ours; and when we speak of celestial sweetness or beauty, we may
be nearer the literal truth than we dream.  If mankind generally
are the shipwrecked survivors of some pre-Adamitic cataclysm, set
adrift in these little open boats of humanity to make one more
trial to reach the shore,--as some grave theologians have
maintained,--if, in plain English, men are the ghosts of dead
devils who have "died into life," (to borrow an expression from
Keats,) and walk the earth in a suit of living rags which lasts
three or four score summers,--why, there must have been a few good
spirits sent to keep them company, and these sweet voices I speak
of must belong to them.

--I wish you could once hear my sister's voice,--said the
schoolmistress.

If it is like yours, it must be a pleasant one,--said I.

I never thought mine was anything,--said the schoolmistress.

How should you know?--said I.--People never hear their own voices,
--any more than they see their own faces.  There is not even a
looking-glass for the voice.  Of course, there is something audible
to us when we speak; but that something is not our own voice as it
is known to all our acquaintances.  I think, if an image spoke to
us in our own tones, we should not know them in the least.--How
pleasant it would be, if in another state of being we could have
shapes like our former selves for playthings,--we standing outside
or inside of them, as we liked, and they being to us just what we
used to be to others!

--I wonder if there will be nothing like what we call "play," after
our earthly toys are broken,--said the schoolmistress.

Hush,--said I,--what will the divinity-student say?

[I thought she was hit, that time;--but the shot must have gone
over her, or on one side of her; she did not flinch.]

Oh,--said the schoolmistress,--he must look out for my sister's
heresies; I am afraid he will be too busy with them to take care of
mine.

Do you mean to say,--said I,--that it is YOUR SISTER whom that
student--

[The young fellow commonly known as John, who had been sitting on
the barrel, smoking, jumped off just then, kicked over the barrel,
gave it a push with his foot that set it rolling, and stuck his
saucy-looking face in at the window so as to cut my question off in
the middle; and the schoolmistress leaving the room a few minutes
afterwards, I did not have a chance to finish it.

The young fellow came in and sat down in a chair, putting his heels
on the top of another.

Pooty girl,--said he.

A fine young lady,--I replied.

Keeps a first-rate school, according to accounts,--said he,
--teaches all sorts of things,--Latin and Italian and music.  Folks
rich once,--smashed up.  She went right ahead as smart as if she'd
been born to work.  That's the kind o' girl I go for.  I'd marry
her, only two or three other girls would drown themselves, if I
did.

I think the above is the longest speech of this young fellow's
which I have put on record.  I do not like to change his peculiar
expressions, for this is one of those cases in which the style is
the man, as M. de Buffon says.  The fact is, the young fellow is a
good-hearted creature enough, only too fond of his jokes,--and if
it were not for those heat-lightning winks on one side of his face,
I should not mind his fun much.]


[Some days after this, when the company were together again, I
talked a little.]

--I don't think I have a genuine hatred for anybody.  I am well
aware that I differ herein from the sturdy English moralist and the
stout American tragedian.  I don't deny that I hate THE SIGHT of
certain people; but the qualities which make me tend to hate the
man himself are such as I am so much disposed to pity, that, except
under immediate aggravation, I feel kindly enough to the worst of
them.  It is such a sad thing to be born a sneaking fellow, so much
worse than to inherit a hump-back or a couple of club-feet, that I
sometimes feel as if we ought to love the crippled souls, if I may
use this expression, with a certain tenderness which we need not
waste on noble natures.  One who is born with such congenital
incapacity that nothing can make a gentleman of him is entitled,
not to our wrath, but to our profoundest sympathy.  But as we
cannot help hating the sight of these people, just as we do that of
physical deformities, we gradually eliminate them from our
society,--we love them, but open the window and let them go.  By
the time decent people reach middle age they have weeded their
circle pretty well of these unfortunates, unless they have a taste
for such animals; in which case, no matter what their position may
be, there is something, you may be sure, in their natures akin to
that of their wretched parasites.

--The divinity-student wished to know what I thought of affinities,
as well as of antipathies; did I believe in love at first sight?

Sir,--said I,--all men love all women.  That is the prima-facie
aspect of the case.  The Court of Nature assumes the law to be,
that all men do so; and the individual man is bound to show cause
why he does not love any particular woman.  A man, says one of my
old black-letter law-books, may show divers good reasons, as thus:
He hath not seen the person named in the indictment; she is of
tender age, or the reverse of that; she hath certain personal
disqualifications,--as, for instance, she is a blackamoor, or hath
an ill-favored countenance; or, his capacity of loving being
limited, his affections are engrossed by a previous comer; and so
of other conditions.  Not the less is it true that he is bound by
duty and inclined by nature to love each and every woman.
Therefore it is that each woman virtually summons every man to show
cause why he doth not love her.  This is not by written document,
or direct speech, for the most part, but by certain signs of silk,
gold, and other materials, which say to all men,--Look on me and
love, as in duty bound.  Then the man pleadeth his special
incapacity, whatsoever that may be,--as, for instance,
impecuniosity, or that he hath one or many wives in his household,
or that he is of mean figure, or small capacity; of which reasons
it may be noted, that the first is, according to late decisions, of
chiefest authority.--So far the old law-book.  But there is a note
from an older authority, saying that every woman doth also love
each and every man, except there be some good reason to the
contrary; and a very observing friend of mine, a young unmarried
clergyman, tells me, that, so far as his experience goes, he has
reason to think the ancient author had fact to justify his
statement.

I'll tell you how it is with the pictures of women we fall in love
with at first sight.

--We a'n't talking about pictures,--said the landlady's daughter,
--we're talking about women.

I understood that we were speaking of love at sight,--I remarked,
mildly.--Now, as all a man knows about a woman whom he looks at is
just what a picture as big as a copper, or a "nickel," rather, at
the bottom of his eye can teach him, I think I am right in saying
we are talking about the pictures of women.--Well, now, the reason
why a man is not desperately in love with ten thousand women at
once is just that which prevents all our portraits being distinctly
seen upon that wall.  They all ARE painted there by reflection from
our faces, but because ALL of them are painted on each spot, and
each on the same surface, and many other objects at the same time,
no one is seen as a picture.  But darken a chamber and let a single
pencil of rays in through a key-hole, then you have a picture on
the wall.  We never fall in love with a woman in distinction from
women, until we can get an image of her through a pin-hole; and
then we can see nothing else, and nobody but ourselves can see the
image in our mental camera-obscura.

--My friend, the Poet, tells me he has to leave town whenever the
anniversaries come round.

What's the difficulty?--Why, they all want him to get up and make
speeches, or songs, or toasts; which is just the very thing he
doesn't want to do.  He is an old story, he says, and hates to show
on these occasions.  But they tease him, and coax him, and can't do
without him, and feel all over his poor weak head until they get
their fingers on the fontanelle, (the Professor will tell you what
this means,--he says the one at the top of the head always remains
open in poets,) until, by gentle pressure on that soft pulsating
spot, they stupefy him to the point of acquiescence.

There are times, though, he says, when it is a pleasure, before
going to some agreeable meeting, to rush out into one's garden and
clutch up a handful of what grows there,--weeds and violets
together,--not cutting them off, but pulling them up by the roots
with the brown earth they grow in sticking to them.  That's his
idea of a post-prandial performance.  Look here, now.  These verses
I am going to read you, he tells me, were pulled up by the roots
just in that way, the other day.--Beautiful entertainment,--names
there on the plates that flow from all English-speaking tongues as
familiarly as AND or THE; entertainers known wherever good poetry
and fair title-pages are held in esteem; guest a kind-hearted,
modest, genial, hopeful poet, who sings to the hearts of his
countrymen, the British people, the songs of good cheer which the
better days to come, as all honest souls trust and believe, will
turn into the prose of common life.  My friend, the Poet, says you
must not read such a string of verses too literally.  If he trimmed
it nicely below, you wouldn't see the roots, he says, and he likes
to keep them, and a little of the soil clinging to them.

This is the farewell my friend, the Poet, read to his and our
friend, the Poet:-


A GOOD TIME GOING!

Brave singer of the coming time,
Sweet minstrel of the joyous present,
Crowned with the noblest wreath of rhyme,
The holly-leaf of Ayrshire's peasant,
Good-bye!  Good-bye!--Our hearts and hands,
Our lips in honest Saxon phrases,
Cry, God be with him, till he stands
His feet among the English daisies!

'Tis here we part;--for other eyes
The busy deck, the flattering streamer,
The dripping arms that plunge and rise,
The waves in foam, the ship in tremor,
The kerchiefs waving from the pier,
The cloudy pillar gliding o'er him,
The deep blue desert, lone and drear,
With heaven above and home before him!

His home!--the Western giant smiles,
And twirls the spotty globe to find it;--
This little speck the British Isles?
'Tis but a freckle,--never mind it!--
He laughs, and all his prairies roll,
Each gurgling cataract roars and chuckles,
And ridges stretched from pole to pole
Heave till they crack their iron knuckles!

But memory blushes at the sneer,
And Honor turns with frown defiant,
And Freedom, leaning on her spear,
Laughs louder than the laughing giant:-
"An islet is a world," she said,
"When glory with its dust has blended,
And Britain kept her noble dead
Till earth and seas and skies are rended!"

Beneath each swinging forest-bough
Some arm as stout in death reposes,--
From wave-washed foot to heaven-kissed brow
Her valor's life-blood runs in roses;
Nay, let our brothers of the West
Write smiling in their florid pages,
One-half her soil has walked the rest
In poets, heroes, martyrs, sages!

Hugged in the clinging billow's clasp,
From sea-weed fringe to mountain heather,
The British oak with rooted grasp
Her slender handful holds together;--
With cliffs of white and bowers of green,
And Ocean narrowing to caress her,
And hills and threaded streams between,--
Our little mother isle, God bless her!

In earth's broad temple where we stand,
Fanned by the eastern gales that brought us,
We hold the missal in our hand,
Bright with the lines our Mother taught us;
Where'er its blazoned page betrays
The glistening links of gilded fetters,
Behold, the half-turned leaf displays
Her rubric stained in crimson letters!

Enough!  To speed a parting friend
'Tis vain alike to speak and listen;--
Yet stay,--these feeble accents blend
With rays of light from eyes that glisten.
Good-bye! once more,--and kindly tell
In words of peace the young world's story,--
And say, besides,--we love too well
Our mother's soil, our father's glory!

When my friend, the Professor, found that my friend, the Poet, had
been coming out in this full-blown style, he got a little excited,
as you may have seen a canary, sometimes, when another strikes up.
The Professor says he knows he can lecture, and thinks he can write
verses.  At any rate, he has often tried, and now he was determined
to try again.  So when some professional friends of his called him
up, one day, after a feast of reason and a regular "freshet" of
soul which had lasted two or three hours, he read them these
verses.  He introduced them with a few remarks, he told me, of
which the only one he remembered was this:  that he had rather
write a single line which one among them should think worth
remembering than set them all laughing with a string of epigrams.
It was all right, I don't doubt; at any rate, that was his fancy
then, and perhaps another time he may be obstinately hilarious;
however, it may be that he is growing graver, for time is a fact so
long as clocks and watches continue to go, and a cat can't be a
kitten always, as the old gentleman opposite said the other day.

You must listen to this seriously, for I think the Professor was
very much in earnest when he wrote it.


THE TWO ARMIES.

As Life's unending column pours,
Two marshalled hosts are seen,--
Two armies on the trampled shores
That Death flows black between.

One marches to the drum-beat's roll,
The wide-mouthed clarion's bray,
And bears upon a crimson scroll,
"Our glory is to slay."

One moves in silence by the stream,
With sad, yet watchful eyes,
Calm as the patient planet's gleam
That walks the clouded skies.

Along its front no sabres shine,
No blood-red pennons wave;
Its banner bears the single line,
"Our duty is to save."

For those no death-bed's lingering shade;
At Honor's trumpet-call,
With knitted brow and lifted blade
In Glory's arms they fall.

For these no clashing falchions bright,
No stirring battle-cry;
The bloodless stabber calls by night,--
Each answers, "Here am I!"

For those the sculptor's laurelled bust,
The builder's marble piles,
The anthems pealing o'er their dust
Through long cathedral aisles.

For these the blossom-sprinkled turf
That floods the lonely graves,
When Spring rolls in her sea-green surf
In flowery-foaming waves.

Two paths lead upward from below,
And angels wait above,
Who count each burning life-drop's flow,
Each falling tear of Love.

Though from the Hero's bleeding breast
Her pulses Freedom drew,
Though the white lilies in her crest
Sprang from that scarlet dew,--

While Valor's haughty champions wait
Till all their scars are shown,
Love walks unchallenged through the gate,
To sit beside the Throne!



CHAPTER X



[The schoolmistress came down with a rose in her hair,--a fresh
June rose.  She has been walking early; she has brought back two
others,--one on each cheek.

I told her so, in some such pretty phrase as I could muster for the
occasion.  Those two blush-roses I just spoke of turned into a
couple of damasks.  I suppose all this went through my mind, for
this was what I went on to say:-]

I love the damask rose best of all.  The flowers our mothers and
sisters used to love and cherish, those which grow beneath our
eaves and by our doorstep, are the ones we always love best.  If
the Houyhnhnms should ever catch me, and, finding me particularly
vicious and unmanageable, send a man-tamer to Rareyfy me, I'll tell
you what drugs he would have to take and how he would have to use
them.  Imagine yourself reading a number of the Houyhnhnm Gazette,
giving an account of such an experiment.

"MAN-TAMING EXTRAORDINARY.

"THE soft-hoofed semi-quadruped recently captured was subjected to
the art of our distinguished man-tamer in presence of a numerous
assembly.  The animal was led in by two stout ponies, closely
confined by straps to prevent his sudden and dangerous tricks of
shoulder-hitting and foot-striking.  His countenance expressed the
utmost degree of ferocity and cunning.

"The operator took a handful of BUDDING LILAC-LEAVES, and crushing
them slightly between his hoofs, so as to bring out their peculiar
fragrance, fastened them to the end of a long pole and held them
towards the creature.  Its expression changed in an instant,--it
drew in their fragrance eagerly, and attempted to seize them with
its soft split hoofs.  Having thus quieted his suspicious subject,
the operator proceeded to tie a BLUE HYACINTH to the end of the
pole and held it out towards the wild animal.  The effect was
magical.  Its eyes filled as if with raindrops, and its lips
trembled as it pressed them to the flower.  After this it was
perfectly quiet, and brought a measure of corn to the man-tamer,
without showing the least disposition to strike with the feet or
hit from the shoulder."


That will do for the Houyhnhnm Gazette.--Do you ever wonder why
poets talk so much about flowers?  Did you ever hear of a poet who
did not talk about them?  Don't you think a poem, which, for the
sake of being original, should leave them out, would be like those
verses where the letter A or E or some other is omitted?  No,--they
will bloom over and over again in poems as in the summer fields, to
the end of time, always old and always new.  Why should we be more
shy of repeating ourselves than the spring be tired of blossoms or
the night of stars?  Look at Nature.  She never wearies of saying
over her floral pater-noster.  In the crevices of Cyclopean walls,
--in the dust where men lie, dust also,--on the mounds that bury
huge cities, the wreck of Nineveh and the Babel-heap,--still that
same sweet prayer and benediction.  The Amen! of Nature is always a
flower.

Are you tired of my trivial personalities,--those splashes and
streaks of sentiment, sometimes perhaps of sentimentality, which
you may see when I show you my heart's corolla as if it were a
tulip?  Pray, do not give yourself the trouble to fancy me an idiot
whose conceit it is to treat himself as an exceptional being.  It
is because you are just like me that I talk and know that you will
listen.  We are all splashed and streaked with sentiments,--not
with precisely the same tints, or in exactly the same patterns, but
by the same hand and from the same palette.

I don't believe any of you happen to have just the same passion for
the blue hyacinth which I have,--very certainly not for the crushed
lilac-leaf-buds; many of you do not know how sweet they are.  You
love the smell of the sweet-fern and the bayberry-leaves, I don't
doubt; but I hardly think that the last bewitches you with young
memories as it does me.  For the same reason I come back to damask
roses, after having raised a good many of the rarer varieties.  I
like to go to operas and concerts, but there are queer little old
homely sounds that are better than music to me.  However, I suppose
it's foolish to tell such things.

--It is pleasant to be foolish at the right time,--said the
divinity-student;--saying it, however, in one of the dead
languages, which I think are unpopular for summer-reading, and
therefore do not bear quotation as such.

Well, now,--said I,--suppose a good, clean, wholesome-looking
countryman's cart stops opposite my door.--Do I want any
huckleberries?--If I do not, there are those that do.  Thereupon my
soft-voiced handmaid bears out a large tin pan, and then the
wholesome countryman, heaping the peck-measure, spreads his broad
hands around its lower arc to confine the wild and frisky berries,
and so they run nimbly along the narrowing channel until they
tumble rustling down in a black cascade and tinkle on the
resounding metal beneath.--I won't say that this rushing
huckleberry hail-storm has not more music for me than the "Anvil
Chorus."

--I wonder how my great trees are coming on this summer.

--Where are your great trees, Sir?--said the divinity-student.

Oh, all round about New England.  I call all trees mine that I have
put my wedding-ring on, and I have as many tree-wives as Brigham
Young has human ones.

--One set's as green as the other,--exclaimed a boarder, who has
never been identified.

They're all Bloomers,--said the young fellow called John.

[I should have rebuked this trifling with language, if our
landlady's daughter had not asked me just then what I meant by
putting my wedding-ring on a tree.]

Why, measuring it with my thirty-foot tape, my dear,--said I,--I
have worn a tape almost out on the rough barks of our old New
England elms and other big trees.--Don't you want to hear me talk
trees a little now?  That is one of my specialities.

[So they all agreed that they should like to hear me talk about
trees.]

I want you to understand, in the first place, that I have a most
intense, passionate fondness for trees in general, and have had
several romantic attachments to certain trees in particular.  Now,
if you expect me to hold forth in a "scientific" way about my
tree-loves,--to talk, for instance, of the Ulmus Americana, and
describe the ciliated edges of its samara, and all that,--you are an
anserine individual, and I must refer you to a dull friend who will
discourse to you of such matters.  What should you think of a lover
who should describe the idol of his heart in the language of
science, thus:  Class, Mammalia; Order, Primates; Genus, Homo;
Species, Europeus; Variety, Brown; Individual, Ann Eliza; Dental
Formula

 2-2 1-1 2-2 3-3
i---c---p---m---
 2-2 1-1 2-2 3-3'

and so on?

No, my friends, I shall speak of trees as we see them, love them,
adore them in the fields, where they are alive, holding their green
sun-shades over our heads, talking to us with their hundred
thousand whispering tongues, looking down on us with that sweet
meekness which belongs to huge, but limited organisms,--which one
sees in the brown eyes of oxen, but most in the patient posture,
the outstretched arms, and the heavy-drooping robes of these vast
beings endowed with life, but not with soul,--which outgrow us and
outlive us, but stand helpless,--poor things!--while Nature dresses
and undresses them, like so many full-sized, but under-witted
children.

Did you ever read old Daddy Gilpin?  Slowest of men, even of
English men; yet delicious in his slowness, as is the light of a
sleepy eye in woman.  I always supposed "Dr. Syntax" was written to
make fun of him.  I have a whole set of his works, and am very
proud of it, with its gray paper, and open type, and long ff, and
orange-juice landscapes.  The Pere Gilpin had the kind of science I
like in the study of Nature,--a little less observation than White
of Selborne, but a little more poetry.--Just think of applying the
Linnaean system to an elm!  Who cares how many stamens or pistils
that little brown flower, which comes out before the leaf, may have
to classify it by?  What we want is the meaning, the character, the
expression of a tree, as a kind and as an individual.

There is a mother-idea in each particular kind of tree, which, if
well marked, is probably embodied in the poetry of every language.
Take the oak, for instance, and we find it always standing as a
type of strength and endurance.  I wonder if you ever thought of
the single mark of supremacy which distinguishes this tree from all
our other forest-trees?  All the rest of them shirk the work of
resisting gravity; the oak alone defies it.  It chooses the
horizontal direction for its limbs, so that their whole weight may
tell,--and then stretches them out fifty or sixty feet, so that the
strain may be mighty enough to be worth resisting.  You will find,
that, in passing from the extreme downward droop of the branches of
the weeping-willow to the extreme upward inclination of those of
the poplar, they sweep nearly half a circle.  At 90 degrees the oak
stops short; to slant upward another degree would mark infirmity of
purpose; to bend downwards, weakness of organization.  The American
elm betrays something of both; yet sometimes, as we shall see, puts
on a certain resemblance to its sturdier neighbor.

It won't do to be exclusive in our taste about trees.  There is
hardly one of them which has not peculiar beauties in some fitting
place for it.  I remember a tall poplar of monumental proportions
and aspect, a vast pillar of glossy green, placed on the summit of
a lofty hill, and a beacon to all the country round.  A native of
that region saw fit to build his house very near it, and, having a
fancy that it might blow down some time or other, and exterminate
himself and any incidental relatives who might be "stopping" or
"tarrying" with him,--also laboring under the delusion that human
life is under all circumstances to be preferred to vegetable
existence,--had the great poplar cut down.  It is so easy to say,
"It is only a poplar!" and so much harder to replace its living
cone than to build a granite obelisk!

I must tell you about some of my tree-wives.  I was at one period
of my life much devoted to the young lady-population of Rhode
Island, a small, but delightful State in the neighborhood of
Pawtucket.  The number of inhabitants being not very large, I had
leisure, during my visits to the Providence Plantations, to inspect
the face of the country in the intervals of more fascinating
studies of physiognomy.  I heard some talk of a great elm a short
distance from the locality just mentioned.  "Let us see the great
elm,"--I said, and proceeded to find it,--knowing that it was on a
certain farm in a place called Johnston, if I remember rightly.  I
shall never forget my ride and my introduction to the great
Johnston elm.

I always tremble for a celebrated tree when I approach it for the
first time.  Provincialism has no SCALE of excellence in man or
vegetable; it never knows a first-rate article of either kind when
it has it, and is constantly taking second and third rate ones for
Nature's best.  I have often fancied the tree was afraid of me, and
that a sort of shiver came over it as over a betrothed maiden when
she first stands before the unknown to whom she has been plighted.
Before the measuring-tape the proudest tree of them all quails and
shrinks into itself.  All those stories of four or five men
stretching their arms around it and not touching each other's
fingers, if one's pacing the shadow at noon and making it so many
hundred feet, die upon its leafy lips in the presence of the awful
ribbon which has strangled so many false pretensions.

As I rode along the pleasant way, watching eagerly for the object
of my journey, the rounded tops of the elms rose from time to time
at the road-side.  Wherever one looked taller and fuller than the
rest, I asked myself,--"Is this it?"  But as I drew nearer, they
grew smaller,--or it proved, perhaps, that two standing in a line
had looked like one, and so deceived me.  At last, all at once,
when I was not thinking of it,--I declare to you it makes my flesh
creep when I think of it now,--all at once I saw a great, green
cloud swelling in the horizon, so vast, so symmetrical, of such
Olympian majesty and imperial supremacy among the lesser
forest-growths, that my heart stopped short, then jumped at my ribs
as a hunter springs at a five-barred gate, and I felt all through me,
without need of uttering the words,--"This is it!"

You will find this tree described, with many others, in the
excellent Report upon the Trees and Shrubs of Massachusetts.  The
author has given my friend the Professor credit for some of his
measurements, but measured this tree himself, carefully.  It is a
grand elm for size of trunk, spread of limbs, and muscular
development,--one of the first, perhaps the first, of the first
class of New England elms.

The largest actual girth I have ever found at five feet from the
ground is in the great elm lying a stone's throw or two north of
the main road (if my points of compass are right) in Springfield.
But this has much the appearance of having been formed by the union
of two trunks growing side by side.

The West-Springfield elm and one upon Northampton meadows, belong
also to the first class of trees.

There is a noble old wreck of an elm at Hatfield, which used to
spread its claws out over a circumference of thirty-five feet or
more before they covered the foot of its bole up with earth.  This
is the American elm most like an oak of any I have ever seen.

The Sheffield elm is equally remarkable for size and perfection of
form.  I have seen nothing that comes near it in Berkshire County,
and few to compare with it anywhere.  I am not sure that I remember
any other first-class elms in New England, but there may be many.

--What makes a first-class elm?--Why, size, in the first place, and
chiefly.  Anything over twenty feet of clear girth, five feet above
the ground, and with a spread of branches a hundred feet across,
may claim that title, according to my scale.  All of them, with the
questionable exception of the Springfield tree above referred to,
stop, so far as my experience goes, at about twenty-two or
twenty-three feet of girth and a hundred and twenty of spread.

Elms of the second class, generally ranging from fourteen to
eighteen feet, are comparatively common.  The queen of them all is
that glorious tree near one of the churches in Springfield.
Beautiful and stately she is beyond all praise.  The "great tree"
on Boston Common comes in the second rank, as does the one at
Cohasset, which used to have, and probably has still, a head as
round as an apple-tree, and that at Newburyport, with scores of
others which might be mentioned.  These last two have perhaps been
over-celebrated.  Both, however, are pleasing vegetables.  The poor
old Pittsfield elm lives on its past reputation.  A wig of false
leaves is indispensable to make it presentable.

[I don't doubt there may be some monster-elm or other, vegetating
green, but inglorious, in some remote New England village, which
only wants a sacred singer to make it celebrated.  Send us your
measurements,--(certified by the postmaster, to avoid possible
imposition,)--circumference five feet from soil, length of line
from bough-end to bough-end, and we will see what can be done for
you.]

--I wish somebody would get us up the following work:-


SYLVA NOVANGLICA.

Photographs of New England Elms and other Trees, taken upon the
Same Scale of Magnitude.  With Letter-Press Descriptions, by a
Distinguished Literary Gentleman.  Boston & Co. 185..


The same camera should be used,--so far as possible,--at a fixed
distance.  Our friend, who has given us so many interesting figures
in his "Trees of America," must not think this Prospectus invades
his province; a dozen portraits, with lively descriptions, would be
a pretty complement to his large work, which, so far as published,
I find excellent.  If my plan were carried out, and another series
of a dozen English trees photographed on the same scale the
comparison would be charming.

It has always been a favorite idea of mine to bring the life of the
Old and the New World face to face, by an accurate comparison of
their various types of organization.  We should begin with man, of
course; institute a large and exact comparison between the
development of la pianta umana, as Alfieri called it, in different
sections of each country, in the different callings, at different
ages, estimating height, weigh, force by the dynamometer and the
spirometer, and finishing off with a series of typical photographs,
giving the principal national physiognomies.  Mr. Hutchinson has
given us some excellent English data to begin with.

Then I would follow this up by contrasting the various parallel
forms of life in the two continents.  Our naturalists have often
referred to this incidentally or expressly; but the animus of
Nature in the two half globes of the planet is so momentous a point
of interest to our race, that it should be made a subject of
express and elaborate study.  Go out with me into that walk which
we call THE MALL, and look at the English and American elms.  The
American elm is tall, graceful, slender-sprayed, and drooping as if
from languor.  The English elm is compact, robust, holds its
branches up, and carries its leaves for weeks longer than our own
native tree.

Is this typical of the creative force on the two sides of the
ocean, or not?  Nothing but a careful comparison through the whole
realm of life can answer this question.

There is a parallelism without identity in the animal and vegetable
life of the two continents, which favors the task of comparison in
an extraordinary manner.  Just as we have two trees alike in many
ways, yet not the same, both elms, yet easily distinguishable, just
so we have a complete flora and a fauna, which, parting from the
same ideal, embody it with various modifications.  Inventive power
is the only quality of which the Creative Intelligence seems to be
economical; just as with our largest human minds, that is the
divinest of faculties, and the one that most exhausts the mind
which exercises it.  As the same patterns have very commonly been
followed, we can see which is worked out in the largest spirit, and
determine the exact limitations under which the Creator places the
movement of life in all its manifestations in either locality.  We
should find ourselves in a very false position, if it should prove
that Anglo-Saxons can't live here, but die out, if not kept up by
fresh supplies, as Dr. Knox and other more or less wise persons
have maintained.  It may turn out the other way, as I have heard
one of our literary celebrities argue,--and though I took the other
side, I liked his best,--that the American is the Englishman
reinforced.

--Will you walk out and look at those elms with me after
breakfast?--I said to the schoolmistress.

[I am not going to tell lies about it, and say that she blushed,
--as I suppose she ought to have done, at such a tremendous piece of
gallantry as that was for our boarding-house.  On the contrary, she
turned a little pale,--but smiled brightly and said,--Yes, with
pleasure, but she must walk towards her school.--She went for her
bonnet.--The old gentleman opposite followed her with his eyes, and
said he wished he was a young fellow.  Presently she came down,
looking very pretty in her half-mourning bonnet, and carrying a
school-book in her hand.]


MY FIRST WALK WITH THE SCHOOLMISTRESS.


This is the shortest way,--she said, as we came to a corner.--Then
we won't take it,--said I.--The schoolmistress laughed a little,
and said she was ten minutes early, so she could go round.

We walked under Mr. Paddock's row of English elms.  The gray
squirrels were out looking for their breakfasts, and one of them
came toward us in light, soft, intermittent leaps, until he was
close to the rail of the burial-ground.  He was on a grave with a
broad blue-slate-stone at its head, and a shrub growing on it.  The
stone said this was the grave of a young man who was the son of an
Honorable gentleman, and who died a hundred years ago and more.
--Oh, yes, DIED,--with a small triangular mark in one breast, and
another smaller opposite, in his back, where another young man's
rapier had slid through his body; and so he lay down out there on
the Common, and was found cold the next morning, with the
night-dews and the death-dews mingled on his forehead.

Let us have one look at poor Benjamin's grave,--said I.--His bones
lie where his body was laid so long ago, and where the stone says
they lie,--which is more than can be said of most of the tenants of
this and several other burial-grounds.

[The most accursed act of Vandalism ever committed within my
knowledge was the uprooting of the ancient gravestones in three at
least of our city burialgrounds, and one at least just outside the
city, and planting them in rows to suit the taste for symmetry of
the perpetrators.  Many years ago, when this disgraceful process
was going on under my eyes, I addressed an indignant remonstrance
to a leading journal.  I suppose it was deficient in literary
elegance, or too warm in its language; for no notice was taken of
it, and the hyena-horror was allowed to complete itself in the face
of daylight.  I have never got over it.  The bones of my own
ancestors, being entombed, lie beneath their own tablet; but the
upright stones have been shuffled about like chessmen, and nothing
short of the Day of Judgment will tell whose dust lies beneath any
of those records, meant by affection to mark one small spot as
sacred to some cherished memory.  Shame! shame! shame!--that is all
I can say.  It was on public thoroughfares, under the eye of
authority, that this infamy was enacted.  The red Indians would
have known better; the selectmen of an African kraal-village would
have had more respect for their ancestors.  I should like to see
the gravestones which have been disturbed all removed, and the
ground levelled, leaving the flat tombstones; epitaphs were never
famous for truth, but the old reproach of "Here LIES" never had
such a wholesale illustration as in these outraged burial-places,
where the stone does lie above, and the bones do not lie beneath.]

Stop before we turn away, and breathe a woman's sigh over poor
Benjamin's dust.  Love killed him, I think.  Twenty years old, and
out there fighting another young fellow on the Common, in the cool
of that old July evening;--yes, there must have been love at the
bottom of it.

The schoolmistress dropped a rosebud she had in her hand, through
the rails, upon the grave of Benjamin Woodbridge.  That was all her
comment upon what I told her.--How women love Love! said I;--but
she did not speak.

We came opposite the head of a place or court running eastward from
the main street.--Look down there,--I said,--My friend the
Professor lived in that house at the left hand, next the further
corner, for years and years.  He died out of it, the other day.
--Died?--said the schoolmistress.--Certainly,--said I.--We die out of
houses, just as we die out of our bodies.  A commercial smash kills
a hundred men's houses for them, as a railroad crash kills their
mortal frames and drives out the immortal tenants.  Men sicken of
houses until at last they quit them, as the soul leaves its body
when it is tired of its infirmities.  The body has been called "the
house we live in"; the house is quite as much the body we live in.
Shall I tell you some things the Professor said the other day?
--Do!--said the schoolmistress.

A man's body,--said the Professor,--is whatever is occupied by his
will and his sensibility.  The small room down there, where I wrote
those papers you remember reading, was much more a portion of my
body than a paralytic's senseless and motionless arm or leg is of
his.

The soul of a man has a series of concentric envelopes round it,
like the core of an onion, or the innermost of a nest of boxes.
First, he has his natural garment of flesh and blood.  Then, his
artificial integuments, with their true skin of solid stuffs, their
cuticle of lighter tissues, and their variously-tinted pigments.
Thirdly, his domicile, be it a single chamber or a stately mansion.
And then, the whole visible world, in which Time buttons him up as
in a loose outside wrapper.

You shall observe,--the Professor said,--for, like Mr. John Hunter
and other great men, he brings in that SHALL with great effect
sometimes,--you shall observe that a man's clothing or series of
envelopes does after a certain time mould itself upon his
individual nature.  We know this of our hats, and are always
reminded of it when we happen to put them on wrong side foremost.
We soon find that the beaver is a hollow cast of the skull, with
all its irregular bumps and depressions.  Just so all that clothes
a man, even to the blue sky which caps his head,--a little
loosely,--shapes itself to fit each particular being beneath it.
Farmers, sailors, astronomers, poets, lovers, condemned criminals,
all find it different, according to the eyes with which they
severally look.

But our houses shape themselves palpably on our inner and outer
natures.  See a householder breaking up and you will be sure of it.
There is a shell-fish which builds all manner of smaller shells
into the walls of its own.  A house is never a home until we have
crusted it with the spoils of a hundred lives besides those of our
own past.  See what these are and you can tell what the occupant
is.

I had no idea,--said the Professor,--until I pulled up my domestic
establishment the other day, what an enormous quantity of roots I
had been making during the years I was planted there.  Why, there
wasn't a nook or a corner that some fibre had not worked its way
into; and when I gave the last wrench, each of them seemed to
shriek like a mandrake, as it broke its hold and came away.

There is nothing that happens, you know, which must not inevitably,
and which does not actually, photograph itself in every conceivable
aspect and in all dimensions.  The infinite galleries of the Past
await but one brief process and all their pictures will be called
out and fixed forever.  We had a curious illustration of the great
fact on a very humble scale.  When a certain bookcase, long
standing in one place, for which it was built, was removed, there
was the exact image on the wall of the whole, and of many of its
portions.  But in the midst of this picture was another,--the
precise outline of a map which had hung on the wall before the
bookcase was built.  We had all forgotten everything about the map
until we saw its photograph on the wall.  Then we remembered it, as
some day or other we may remember a sin which has been built over
and covered up, when this lower universe is pulled away from before
the wall of Infinity, where the wrong-doing stands self-recorded.

The Professor lived in that house a long time,--not twenty years,
but pretty near it.  When he entered that door, two shadows glided
over the threshold; five lingered in the doorway when he passed
through it for the last time,--and one of the shadows was claimed
by its owner to be longer than his own.  What changes he saw in
that quiet place!  Death rained through every roof but his;
children came into life, grew to maturity, wedded, faded away,
threw themselves away; the whole drama of life was played in that
stock-company's theatre of a dozen houses, one of which was his,
and no deep sorrow or severe calamity ever entered his dwelling.
Peace be to those walls, forever,--the Professor said,--for the
many pleasant years he has passed within them!

The Professor has a friend, now living at a distance, who has been
with him in many of his changes of place, and who follows him in
imagination with tender interest wherever he goes.--In that little
court, where he lived in gay loneliness so long,--

--in his autumnal sojourn by the Connecticut, where it comes
loitering down from its mountain fastnesses like a great lord,
swallowing up the small proprietary rivulets very quietly as it
goes, until it gets proud and swollen and wantons in huge luxurious
oxbows about the fair Northampton meadows, and at last overflows
the oldest inhabitant's memory in profligate freshets at Hartford
and all along its lower shores,--up in that caravansary on the
banks of the stream where Ledyard launched his log canoe, and the
jovial old Colonel used to lead the Commencement processions,
--where blue Ascutney looked down from the far distance, and the
hills of Beulah, as the Professor always called them, rolled up the
opposite horizon in soft climbing masses, so suggestive of the
Pilgrim's Heavenward Path that he used to look through his old
"Dollond" to see if the Shining Ones were not within range of
sight,--sweet visions, sweetest in those Sunday walks which carried
them by the peaceful common, through the solemn village lying in
cataleptic stillness under the shadow of the rod of Moses, to the
terminus of their harmless stroll,--the patulous fage, in the
Professor's classic dialect,--the spreading beech, in more familiar
phrase,--[stop and breathe here a moment, for the sentence is not
done yet, and we have another long journey before us,]--

--and again once more up among those other hills that shut in the
amber-flowing Housatonic,--dark stream, but clear, like the lucid
orbs that shine beneath the lids of auburn-haired, sherry-wine-eyed
demi-blondes,--in the home overlooking the winding stream and the
smooth, flat meadow; looked down upon by wild hills, where the
tracks of bears and catamounts may yet sometimes be seen upon the
winter snow; facing the twin summits which rise in the far North,
the highest waves of the great land-storm in all this billowy
region,--suggestive to mad fancies of the breasts of a half-buried
Titaness, stretched out by a stray thunderbolt, and hastily hidden
away beneath the leaves of the forest,--in that home where seven
blessed summers were passed, which stand in memory like the seven
golden candlesticks in the beatific vision of the holy dreamer,--

--in that modest dwelling we were just looking at, not glorious,
yet not unlovely in the youth of its drab and mahogany,--full of
great and little boys' playthings from top to bottom,--in all these
summer or winter nests he was always at home and always welcome.

This long articulated sigh of reminiscences,--this calenture which
shows me the maple-shadowed plains of Berkshire and the mountain-
circled green of Grafton beneath the salt waves which come feeling
their way along the wall at my feet, restless and soft-touching as
blind men's busy fingers,--is for that friend of mine who looks
into the waters of the Patapsco and sees beneath them the same
visions which paint themselves for me in the green depths of the
Charles.

--Did I talk all this off to the schoolmistress?--Why, no,--of
course not.  I have been talking with you, the reader, for the last
ten minutes.  You don't think I should expect any woman to listen
to such a sentence as that long one, without giving her a chance to
put in a word?

--What did I say to the schoolmistress?--Permit me one moment.  I
don't doubt your delicacy and good-breeding; but in this particular
case, as I was allowed the privilege of walking alone with a very
interesting young woman, you must allow me to remark, in the
classic version of a familiar phrase, used by our Master Benjamin
Franklin, it is nullum tui negotii.

When the schoolmistress and I reached the school-room door, the
damask roses I spoke of were so much heightened in color by
exercise that I felt sure it would be useful to her to take a
stroll like this every morning, and made up my mind I would ask her
to let me join her again.


EXTRACT FROM MY PRIVATE JOURNAL.
(To be burned unread.)


I am afraid I have been a fool; for I have told as much of myself
to this young person as if she were of that ripe and discreet age
which invites confidence and expansive utterance.  I have been
low-spirited and listless, lately,--it is coffee, I think,
--(I observe that which is bought READY-GROUND never affects the
head,)--and I notice that I tell my secrets too easily when I am
downhearted.

There are inscriptions on our hearts, which, like that on Dighton
Rock, are never to be seen except at dead-low tide.

There is a woman's footstep on the sand at the side of my deepest
ocean-buried inscription!

--Oh, no, no, no! a thousand times, no!--Yet what is this which has
been shaping itself in my soul?--Is it a thought?--is it a dream?
--is it a PASSION?--Then I know what comes next.

--The Asylum stands on a bright and breezy hill; those glazed
corridors are pleasant to walk in, in bad weather.  But there are
iron bars to all the windows.  When it is fair, some of us can
stroll outside that very high fence.  But I never see much life in
those groups I sometimes meet;--and then the careful man watches
them so closely!  How I remember that sad company I used to pass on
fine mornings, when I was a schoolboy!--B., with his arms full of
yellow weeds,--ore from the gold mines which he discovered long
before we heard of California,--Y., born to millions, crazed by too
much plum-cake, (the boys said,) dogged, explosive,--made a
Polyphemus of my weak-eyed schoolmaster, by a vicious flirt with a
stick,--(the multi-millonnaires sent him a trifle, it was said, to
buy another eye with; but boys are jealous of rich folks, and I
don't doubt the good people made him easy for life,)--how I
remember them all!

I recollect, as all do, the story of the Hall of Eblis, in
"Vathek," and how each shape, as it lifted its hand from its
breast, showed its heart,--a burning coal.  The real Hall of Eblis
stands on yonder summit.  Go there on the next visiting-day, and
ask that figure crouched in the corner, huddled up like those
Indian mummies and skeletons found buried in the sitting posture,
to lift its hand,--look upon its heart, and behold, not fire, but
ashes.--No, I must not think of such an ending!  Dying would be a
much more gentlemanly way of meeting the difficulty.  Make a will
and leave her a house or two and some stocks, and other little
financial conveniences, to take away her necessity for keeping
school.--I wonder what nice young man's feet would be in my French
slippers before six months were over!  Well, what then?  If a man
really loves a woman, of course he wouldn't marry her for the
world, if he were not quite sure that he was the best person she
could by any possibility marry.

--It is odd enough to read over what I have just been writing.--It
is the merest fancy that ever was in the world.  I shall never be
married.  She will; and if she is as pleasant as she has been so
far, I will give her a silver tea-set, and go and take tea with her
and her husband, sometimes.  No coffee, I hope, though,--it
depresses me sadly.  I feel very miserably;--they must have been
grinding it at home.--Another morning walk will be good for me, and
I don't doubt the schoolmistress will be glad of a little fresh air
before school.


--The throbbing flushes of the poetical intermittent have been
coming over me from time to time of late.  Did you ever see that
electrical experiment which consists in passing a flash through
letters of gold-leaf in a darkened room, whereupon some name or
legend springs out of the darkness in characters of fire?

There are songs all written out in my soul, which I could read, if
the flash might pass through them,--but the fire must come down
from heaven.  Ah! but what if the stormy nimbus of youthful passion
has blown by, and one asks for lightning from the ragged cirrus of
dissolving aspirations, or the silvered cumulus of sluggish
satiety?  I will call on her whom the dead poets believed in, whom
living ones no longer worship,--the immortal maid, who, name her
what you will,--Goddess, Muse, Spirit of Beauty,--sits by the
pillow of every youthful poet, and bends over his pale forehead
until her tresses lie upon his cheek and rain their gold into his
dreams.


MUSA.

O my lost Beauty!--hast thou folded quite
Thy wings of morning light
Beyond those iron gates
Where Life crowds hurrying to the haggard Fates,
And Age upon his mound of ashes waits
To chill our fiery dreams,
Hot from the heart of youth plunged in his icy streams?

Leave me not fading in these weeds of care,
Whose flowers are silvered hair!--
Have I not loved thee long,
Though my young lips have often done thee wrong
And vexed thy heaven-tuned ear with careless song?
Ah, wilt thou yet return,
Bearing thy rose-hued torch, and bid thine altar burn?

Come to me!--I will flood thy silent shine
With my soul's sacred wine,
And heap thy marble floors
As the wild spice-trees waste their fragrant stores
In leafy islands walled with madrepores
And lapped in Orient seas,
When all their feathery palm toss, plume-like, in the breeze.

Come to me!--thou shalt feed on honied words,
Sweeter than song of birds;--
No wailing bulbul's throat,
No melting dulcimer's melodious note,
When o'er the midnight wave its murmurs float,
Thy ravished sense might soothe
With flow so liquid-soft, with strain so velvet-smooth.

Thou shalt be decked with jewels, like a queen,
Sought in those bowers of green
Where loop the clustered vines
And the close-clinging dulcamara twines,--
Pure pearls of Maydew where the moonlight shines,
And Summer's fruited gems,
And coral pendants shorn from Autumn's berried stems.

Sit by me drifting on the sleepy waves,--
Or stretched by grass-grown graves,
Whose gray, high-shouldered stones,
Carved with old names Life's time-worn roll disowns,
Lean, lichen-spotted, o'er the crumbled bones
Still slumbering where they lay
While the sad Pilgrim watched to scare the wolf away.

Spread o'er my couch thy visionary wing!
Still let me dream and sing,--
Dream of that winding shore
Where scarlet cardinals bloom,--for me no more,--
The stream with heaven beneath its liquid floor,
And clustering nenuphars
Sprinkling its mirrored blue like golden-chaliced stars!

Come while their balms the linden-blossoms shed!--
Come while the rose is red,--
While blue-eyed Summer smiles
On the green ripples round you sunken piles
Washed by the moon-wave warm from Indian isles,
And on the sultry air
The chestnuts spread their palms like holy men in prayer!

Oh, for thy burning lips to fire my brain
With thrills of wild sweet pain!--
On life's autumnal blast,
Like shrivelled leaves, youth's, passion-flowers are cast,--
Once loving thee, we love thee to the last!--
Behold thy new-decked shrine,
And hear once more the voice that breathed "Forever thine!"



CHAPTER XI



[The company looked a little flustered one morning when I came in,
--so much so, that I inquired of my neighbor, the divinity-student,)
what had been going on.  It appears that the young fellow whom they
call John had taken advantage of my being a little late (I having
been rather longer than usual dressing that morning) to circulate
several questions involving a quibble or play upon words,--in
short, containing that indignity to the human understanding,
condemned in the passages from the distinguished moralist of the
last century and the illustrious historian of the present, which I
cited on a former occasion, and known as a PUN.  After breakfast,
one of the boarders handed me a small roll of paper containing some
of the questions and their answers.  I subjoin two or three of
them, to show what a tendency there is to frivolity and meaningless
talk in young persons of a certain sort, when not restrained by the
presence of more reflective natures.--It was asked, "Why tertian
and quartan fevers were like certain short-lived insects."  Some
interesting physiological relation would be naturally suggested.
The inquirer blushes to find that the answer is in the paltry
equivocation, that they SKIP a day or two.--"Why an Englishman must
go to the Continent to weaken his grog or punch."  The answer
proves to have no relation whatever to the temperance-movement, as
no better reason is given than that island--(or, as it is absurdly
written, ILE AND) water won't mix.--But when I came to the next
question and its answer, I felt that patience ceased to be a
virtue.  "Why an onion is like a piano" is a query that a person of
sensibility would be slow to propose; but that in an educated
community an individual could be found to answer it in these
words,--"Because it smell odious," quasi, it's melodious,--is not
credible, but too true.  I can show you the paper.

Dear reader, I beg your pardon for repeating such things.  I know
most conversations reported in books are altogether above such
trivial details, but folly will come up at every table as surely as
purslain and chickweed and sorrel will come up in gardens.  This
young fellow ought to have talked philosophy, I know perfectly
well; but he didn't,--he made jokes.]

I am willing,--I said,--to exercise your ingenuity in a rational
and contemplative manner.--No, I do not proscribe certain forms of
philosophical speculation which involve an approach to the absurd
or the ludicrous, such as you may find, for example, in the folio
of the Reverend Father Thomas Sanchez, in his famous Disputations,
"De Sancto Matrimonio."  I will therefore turn this levity of yours
to profit by reading you a rhymed problem, wrought out by my friend
the Professor.


THE DEACON'S MASTERPIECE:
OR THE WONDERFUL "ONE-HOSS-SHAY."
A LOGICAL STORY.

Have you heard of the wonderful one-shay,
That was built in such a logical way
It ran a hundred years to a day,
And then, of a sudden, it--ah, but stay,
I'll tell you what happened without delay,
Scaring the parson into fits,
Frightening people out of their wits,--
Have you ever heard of that, I say?

Seventeen hundred and fifty-five.
Georgius Secundus was then alive,--
Snuffy old drone from the German hive.
That was the year when Lisbon-town
Saw the earth open and gulp her down,
And Braddock's army was done so brown,
Left without a scalp to its crown.
It was on the terrible Earthquake-day
That the Deacon finished the one-hoss-shay.

Now in building of chaises, I tell you what,
There is always SOMEWHERE a weakest spot,--
In hub, tire, felloe, in spring or thill,
In panel, or crossbar, or floor, or sill,
In screw, bolt, thoroughbrace,--lurking still
Find it somewhere you must and will,--
Above or below, or within or without,--
And that's the reason, beyond a doubt,
A chaise BREASTS DOWN, but doesn't WEAR OUT.

But the Deacon swore (as Deacons do,
With an "I dew vum," or an "I tell YEOU,")
He would build one shay to beat the taown
'n' the keounty 'n' all the kentry raoun';
It should be so built that it COULDN' break daown--
--"Fur," said the Deacon, "'t's mighty plain
Thut the weakes' place mus' stan the strain;
'n' the way t' fix it, uz I maintain,
Is only jest
T' make that place uz strong uz the rest."

So the Deacon inquired of the village folk
Where he could find the strongest oak,
That couldn't be split nor bent nor broke,--
That was for spokes and floor and sills;
He sent for lancewood to make the thills;
The crossbars were ash, from the straightest trees;
The panels of white-wood, that cuts like cheese,
But lasts like iron for things like these;
The hubs of logs from the "Settler's ellum,"--
Last of its timber,--they couldn't sell 'em,
Never an axe had seen their chips,
And the wedges flew from between their lips,
Their blunt ends frizzled like celery-tips;
Step and prop-iron, bolt and screw,
Spring, tire, axle, and linchpin too,
Steel of the finest, bright and blue;
Thoroughbrace bison-skin, thick and wide;
Boot, top, dasher, from tough old hide
Found in the pit when the tanner died.
That was the way he "put her through."--
"There!" said the Deacon, "naow she'll dew."

Do!  I tell you, I father guess
She was a wonder, and nothing less!
Colts grew horses, beards turned gray,
Deacon and deaconess dropped away,
Children and grand-children--where were they?
But there stood the stout old one-hoss-shay
As fresh as on Lisbon-earthquake-day!

EIGHTEEN HUNDRED;--it came and found
The Deacon's Masterpiece strong and sound.
Eighteen hundred increased by ten;--
"Hahnsum kerridge" they called it then.
Eighteen hundred and twenty came;--
Running as usual; much the same.
Thirty and forty at last arrive,
And then come fifty, and FIFTY-FIVE.

Little of all we value here
Wakes on the morn of its hundredth year
Without both feeling and looking queer.
In fact, there's nothing that keeps its youth,
So far as I know, but a tree and truth.
(This is a moral that runs at large;
Take it.--You're welcome.--No extra charge.)

FIRST OF NOVEMBER,--the Earthquake-day.--
There are traces of age in the one-hoss-shay.
A general flavor of mild decay,
But nothing local, as one may say.
There couldn't be,--for the Deacon's art
Had made it so like in every part
That there wasn't a chance for one to start.
For the wheels were just as strong as the thills,
And the floor was just as strong as the sills,
And the panels just as strong as the floor,
And the whippletree neither less nor more,
And the back-crossbar as strong as the fore,
And spring and axle and hub encore.
And yet, AS A WHOLE, it is past a doubt
In another hour it will be WORN OUT!

First of November, 'Fifty-five!
This morning the parson takes a drive.
Now, small boys, get out of the way!
Here comes the wonderful one-horse-shay,
Drawn by a rat-tailed, ewe-necked bay.
"Huddup!" said the parson.--Off went they.

The parson was working his Sunday's text,--
Had got to FIFTHLY, and stopped perplexed
At what the--Moses--was coming next.
All at once the horse stood still,
Close by the meet'n-house on the hill.
--First a shiver, and then a thrill,
Then something decidedly like a spill,--
And the parson was sitting upon a rock,
At half-past nine by the meet'n-house clock,--
Just the hour of the Earthquake shock!
--What do you think the parson found,
When he got up and stared around?
The poor old chaise in a heap or mound,
As if it had been to the mill and ground!
You see, of course, if you're not a dunce,
How it went to pieces all at once,--
All at once, and nothing first,--
Just as bubbles do when they burst.

End of the wonderful one-hoss-shay.
Logic is logic.  That's all I say.


--I think there is one habit,--I said to our company a day or two
afterwards--worse than that of punning.  It is the gradual
substitution of cant or flash terms for words which truly
characterize their objects.  I have known several very genteel
idiots whose whole vocabulary had deliquesced into some half dozen
expressions.  All things fell into one of two great categories,
--FAST or SLOW.  Man's chief end was to be a BRICK.  When the great
calamities of life overtook their friends, these last were spoken
of as being a GOOD DEAL CUT UP.  Nine-tenths of human existence
were summed up in the single word, BORE.  These expressions come to
be the algebraic symbols of minds which have grown too weak or
indolent to discriminate.  They are the blank checks of
intellectual bankruptcy;--you may fill them up with what idea you
like; it makes no difference, for there are no funds in the
treasury upon which they are drawn.  Colleges and good-for-nothing
smoking-clubs are the places where these conversational fungi
spring up most luxuriantly.  Don't think I undervalue the proper
use and application of a cant word or phrase.  It adds piquancy to
conversation, as a mushroom does to a sauce.  But it is no better
than a toadstool, odious to the sense and poisonous to the
intellect, when it spawns itself all over the talk of men and
youths capable of talking, as it sometimes does.  As we hear flash
phraseology, it is commonly the dishwater from the washings of
English dandyism, school-boy or full-grown, wrung out of a
three-volume novel which had sopped it up, or decanted from the
pictured urn of Mr. Verdant Green, and diluted to suit the provincial
climate.

--The young fellow called John spoke up sharply and said, it was
"rum" to hear me "pitchin' into fellers" for "goin' it in the slang
line," when I used all the flash words myself just when I pleased.

--I replied with my usual forbearance.--Certainly, to give up the
algebraic symbol, because A or B is often a cover for ideal
nihility, would be unwise.  I have heard a child laboring to
express a certain condition, involving a hitherto undescribed
sensation (as it supposed,) all of which could have been
sufficiently explained by the participle--BORED.  I have seen a
country-clergyman, with a one-story intellect and a one-horse
vocabulary, who has consumed his valuable time (and mine) freely,
in developing an opinion of a brother-minister's discourse which
would have been abundantly characterized by a peach-down-lipped
sophomore in the one word--SLOW.  Let us discriminate, and be shy
of absolute proscription.  I am omniverbivorous by nature and
training.  Passing by such words as are poisonous, I can swallow
most others, and chew such as I cannot swallow.

Dandies are not good for much, but they are good for something.
They invent or keep in circulation those conversational blank
checks or counters just spoken of, which intellectual capitalists
may sometimes find it worth their while to borrow of them.  They
are useful, too, in keeping up the standard of dress, which, but
for them, would deteriorate, and become, what some old fools would
have it, a matter of convenience, and not of taste and art.  Yes, I
like dandies well enough,--on one condition.

--What is that, Sir?--said the divinity-student.

--That they have pluck.  I find that lies at the bottom of all true
dandyism.  A little boy dressed up very fine, who puts his finger
in his mouth and takes to crying, if other boys make fun of him,
looks very silly.  But if he turns red in the face and knotty in
the fists, and makes an example of the biggest of his assailants,
throwing off his fine Leghorn and his thickly-buttoned jacket, if
necessary, to consummate the act of justice, his small toggery
takes on the splendors of the crested helmet that frightened
Astyanax.  You remember that the Duke said his dandy officers were
his best officers.  The "Sunday blood," the super-superb sartorial
equestrian of our annual Fast-day, is not imposing or dangerous.
But such fellows as Brummel and D'Orsay and Byron are not to be
snubbed quite so easily.  Look out for "la main de fer sous le gant
de velours," (which I printed in English the other day without
quotation-marks, thinking whether any scarabaeus criticus would add
this to his globe and roll in glory with it into the newspapers,
--which he didn't do it, in the charming pleonasm of the London
language, and therefore I claim the sole merit of exposing the
same.)  A good many powerful and dangerous people have had a
decided dash of dandyism about them.  There was Alcibiades, the
"curled son of Clinias," an accomplished young man, but what would
be called a "swell" in these days.  There was Aristoteles, a very
distinguished writer, of whom you have heard,--a philosopher, in
short, whom it took centuries to learn, centuries to unlearn, and
is now going to take a generation or more to learn over again.
Regular dandy, he was.  So was Marcus Antonius; and though he lost
his game, he played for big stakes, and it wasn't his dandyism that
spoiled his chance.  Petrarca was not to be despised as a scholar
or a poet, but he was one of the same sort.  So was Sir Humphrey
Davy; so was Lord Palmerston, formerly, if I am not forgetful.
Yes,--a dandy is good for something as such; and dandies such as I
was just speaking of have rocked this planet like a cradle,--aye,
and left it swinging to this day.--Still, if I were you, I wouldn't
go to the tailor's, on the strength of these remarks, and run up a
long bill which will render pockets a superfluity in your next
suit.  Elegans "nascitur, non fit."  A man is born a dandy, as he
is born a poet.  There are heads that can't wear hats; there are
necks that can't fit cravats; there are jaws that can't fill out
collars--(Willis touched this last point in one of his earlier
ambrotypes, if I remember rightly); there are tournures nothing can
humanize, and movements nothing can subdue to the gracious suavity
or elegant languor or stately serenity which belong to different
styles of dandyism.

We are forming an aristocracy, as you may observe, in this
country,--not a gratia-Dei, nor a juredivino one,--but a de-facto
upper stratum of being, which floats over the turbid waves of
common life like the iridescent film you may have seen spreading
over the water about our wharves,--very splendid, though its origin
may have been tar, tallow, train-oil, or other such unctuous
commodities.  I say, then, we are forming an aristocracy; and,
transitory as its individual life often is, it maintains itself
tolerably, as a whole.  Of course, money is its corner-stone.  But
now observe this.  Money kept for two or three generations
transforms a race,--I don't mean merely in manners and hereditary
culture, but in blood and bone.  Money buys air and sunshine, in
which children grow up more kindly, of course, than in close, back
streets; it buys country-places to give them happy and healthy
summers, good nursing, good doctoring, and the best cuts of beef
and mutton.  When the spring-chickens come to market--I beg your
pardon,--that is not what I was going to speak of.  As the young
females of each successive season come on, the finest specimens
among them, other things being equal, are apt to attract those who
can afford the expensive luxury of beauty.  The physical character
of the next generation rises in consequence.  It is plain that
certain families have in this way acquired an elevated type of face
and figure, and that in a small circle of city-connections one may
sometimes find models of both sexes which one of the rural counties
would find it hard to match from all its townships put together.
Because there is a good deal of running down, of degeneration and
waste of life, among the richer classes, you must not overlook the
equally obvious fact I have just spoken of,--which in one or two
generations more will be, I think, much more patent than just now.

The weak point in our chryso-aristocracy is the same I have alluded
to in connection with cheap dandyism.  Its thorough manhood, its
high-caste gallantry, are not so manifest as the plate-glass of
its windows and the more or less legitimate heraldry of its
coach-panels.  It is very curious to observe of how small account
military folks are held among our Northern people.  Our young men
must gild their spurs, but they need not win them.  The equal
division of property keeps the younger sons of rich people above
the necessity of military service.  Thus the army loses an element
of refinement, and the moneyed upper class forgets what it is to
count heroism among its virtues.  Still I don't believe in any
aristocracy without pluck as its backbone.  Ours may show it when
the time comes, if it ever does come.

--These United States furnish the greatest market for intellectual
GREEN FRUIT of all the places in the world.  I think so, at any
rate.  The demand for intellectual labor is so enormous and the
market so far from nice, that young talent is apt to fare like
unripe gooseberries,--get plucked to make a fool of.  Think of a
country which buys eighty thousand copies of the "Proverbial
Philosophy," while the author's admiring countrymen have been
buying twelve thousand!  How can one let his fruit hang in the sun
until it gets fully ripe, while there are eighty thousand such
hungry mouths ready to swallow it and proclaim its praises?
Consequently, there never was such a collection of crude pippins
and half-grown windfalls as our native literature displays among
its fruits.  There are literary green-groceries at every corner,
which will buy anything, from a button-pear to a pine-apple.  It
takes a long apprenticeship to train a whole people to reading and
writing.  The temptation of money and fame is too great for young
people.  Do I not remember that glorious moment when the late Mr.----
we won't say who,--editor of the--we won't say what, offered me the
sum of fifty cents per double-columned quarto page for shaking my
young boughs over his foolscap apron?  Was it not an intoxicating
vision of gold and glory?  I should doubtless have revelled in its
wealth and splendor, but for learning that the FIFTY CENTS was to
be considered a rhetorical embellishment, and by no means a literal
expression of past fact or present intention.

--Beware of making your moral staple consist of the negative
virtues.  It is good to abstain, and teach others to abstain, from
all that is sinful or hurtful.  But making a business of it leads
to emaciation of character, unless one feeds largely also on the
more nutritious diet of active sympathetic benevolence.

--I don't believe one word of what you are saying,--spoke up the
angular female in black bombazine.

I am sorry you disbelieve it, Madam,--I said, and added softly to
my next neighbor,--but you prove it.

The young fellow sitting near me winked; and the divinity-student
said, in an undertone,--Optime dictum.

Your talking Latin,--said I,--reminds me of an odd trick of one of
my old tutors.  He read so much of that language, that his English
half turned into it.  He got caught in town, one hot summer, in
pretty close quarters, and wrote, or began to write, a series of
city pastorals.  Eclogues he called them, and meant to have
published them by subscription.  I remember some of his verses, if
you want to hear them.--You, Sir, (addressing myself to the
divinity-student,) and all such as have been through college, or,
what is the same thing, received an honorary degree, will
understand them without a dictionary.  The old man had a great deal
to say about "aestivation," as he called it, in opposition, as one
might say, to hibernation.  Intramural aestivation, or town-life in
summer, he would say, is a peculiar form of suspended existence, or
semi-asphyxia.  One wakes up from it about the beginning of the
last week in September.  This is what I remember of his poem:-


AESTIVATION.

An Unpublished Poem, by my late Latin Tutor

In candent ire the solar splendor flames;
The foles, languescent, pend from arid rames;
His humid front the cive, anheling, wipes,
And dreams of erring on ventiferous ripes.

How dulce to vive occult to mortal eyes,
Dorm on the herb with none to supervise,
Carp the suave berries from the crescent vine,
And bibe the flow from longicaudate kine!

To me, alas! no verdurous visions come,
Save yon exiguous pool's conferva-scum,--
No concave vast repeats the tender hue
That laves my milk-jug with celestial blue!

Me wretched!  Let me curr to quercine shades
Effund your albid hausts, lactiferous maids!
Oh, might I vole to some umbrageous clump,--
Depart,--be off,--excede,--evade,--erump!


--I have lived by the sea-shore and by the mountains.--No, I am not
going to say which is best.  The one where your place is is the
best for you.  But this difference there is:  you can domesticate
mountains, but the sea is ferae naturae.  You may have a hut, or
know the owner of one, on the mountain-side; you see a light
half-way up its ascent in the evening, and you know there is a home,
and you might share it.  You have noted certain trees, perhaps; you
know the particular zone where the hemlocks look so black in
October, when the maples and beeches have faded.  All its reliefs
and intaglios have electrotyped themselves in the medallions that
hang round the walls of your memory's chamber.--The sea remembers
nothing.  It is feline.  It licks your feet,--its huge flanks purr
very pleasantly for you; but it will crack your bones and eat you,
for all that, and wipe the crimsoned foam from its jaws as if
nothing had happened.  The mountains give their lost children
berries and water; the sea mocks their thirst and lets them die.
The mountains have a grand, stupid, lovable tranquillity; the sea
has a fascinating, treacherous intelligence.  The mountains lie
about like huge ruminants, their broad backs awful to look upon,
but safe to handle.  The sea smooths its silver scales until you
cannot see their joints,--but their shining is that of a snake's
belly, after all.--In deeper suggestiveness I find as great a
difference.  The mountains dwarf mankind and foreshorten the
procession of its long generations.  The sea drowns out humanity
and time; it has no sympathy with either; for it belongs to
eternity, and of that it sings its monotonous song forever and
ever.

Yet I should love to have a little box by the seashore.  I should
love to gaze out on the wild feline element from a front window of
my own, just as I should love to look on a caged panther, and see
it, stretch its shining length, and then curl over and lap its
smooth sides, and by-and-by begin to lash itself into rage and show
its white teeth and spring at its bars, and howl the cry of its
mad, but, to me, harmless fury.--And then,--to look at it with that
inward eye,--who does not love to shuffle off time and its
concerns, at intervals,--to forget who is President and who is
Governor, what race he belongs to, what language he speaks, which
golden-headed nail of the firmament his particular planetary system
is hung upon, and listen to the great liquid metronome as it beats
its solemn measure, steadily swinging when the solo or duet of
human life began, and to swing just as steadily after the human
chorus has died out and man is a fossil on its shores?

--What should decide one, in choosing a summer residence?
--Constitution, first of all.  How much snow could you melt in an
hour, if you were planted in a hogshead of it?  Comfort is
essential to enjoyment.  All sensitive people should remember that
persons in easy circumstances suffer much more cold in summer--that
is, the warm half of the year--than in winter, or the other half.
You must cut your climate to your constitution, as much as your
clothing to your shape.  After this, consult your taste and
convenient.  But if you would be happy in Berkshire, you must carry
mountains in your brain; and if you would enjoy Nahant, you must
have an ocean in your soul.  Nature plays at dominos with you; you
must match her piece, or she will never give it up to you.

--The schoolmistress said, in a rather mischievous way, that she
was afraid some minds or souls would be a little crowded, if they
took in the Rocky Mountains or the Atlantic.

Have you ever read the little book called "The Stars and the
Earth?"--said I.--Have you seen the Declaration of Independence
photographed in a surface that a fly's foot would cover?  The forms
or conditions of Time and Space, as Kant will tell you, are nothing
in themselves,--only our way of looking at things.  You are right,
I think, however, in recognizing the category of Space as being
quite as applicable to minds as to the outer world.  Every man of
reflection is vaguely conscious of an imperfectly-defined circle
which is drawn about his intellect.  He has a perfectly clear sense
that the fragments of his intellectual circle include the curves of
many other minds of which he is cognizant.  He often recognizes
these as manifestly concentric with his own, but of less radius.
On the other hand, when we find a portion of an are on the outside
of our own, we say it INTERSECTS ours, but are very slow to confess
or to see that it CIRCUMSCRIBES it.  Every now and then a man's
mind is stretched by a new idea or sensation, and never shrinks
back to its former dimensions.  After looking at the Alps, I felt
that my mind had been stretched beyond the limits of its
elasticity, and fitted so loosely on my old ideas of space that I
had to spread these to fit it.

--If I thought I should ever see the Alps!--said the
schoolmistress.

Perhaps you will, some time or other,--I said.

It is not very likely,--she answered.--I have had one or two
opportunities, but I had rather be anything than governess in a
rich family.

[Proud, too, you little soft-voiced woman!  Well, I can't say I
like you any the worse for it.  How long will school-keeping take
to kill you?  Is it possible the poor thing works with her needle,
too?  I don't like those marks on the side of her forefinger.

Tableau.  Chamouni.  Mont Blanc in full view.  Figures in the
foreground; two of them standing apart; one of them a gentleman
of--oh,--ah,--yes! the other a lady in a white cashmere, leaning on
his shoulder.--The ingenuous reader will understand that this was
an internal, private, personal, subjective diorama, seen for one
instant on the background of my own consciousness, and abolished
into black nonentity by the first question which recalled me to
actual life, as suddenly as if one of those iron shop-blinds (which
I always pass at dusk with a shiver, expecting to stumble over some
poor but honest shop-boy's head, just taken off by its sudden and
unexpected descent, and left outside upon the sidewalk) had come
down in front of it "by the run."]

--Should you like to hear what moderate wishes life brings one to
at last?  I used to be very ambitious,--wasteful, extravagant, and
luxurious in all my fancies.  Read too much in the "Arabian
Nights."  Must have the lamp,--couldn't do without the ring.
Exercise every morning on the brazen horse.  Plump down into
castles as full of little milk-white princesses as a nest is of
young sparrows.  All love me dearly at once.--Charming idea of
life, but too high-colored for the reality.  I have outgrown all
this; my tastes have become exceedingly primitive,--almost,
perhaps, ascetic.  We carry happiness into our condition, but must
not hope to find it there.  I think you will be willing to hear
some lines which embody the subdued and limited desires of my
maturity.


CONTENTMENT.

"Man wants but little here below."

Little I ask, my wants are few;
I only wish a hut of stone,
(A VERY PLAIN brown stone will do,)
That I may call my own;--
And close at hand is such a one,
In yonder street that fronts the sun.

Plain food is quite enough for me;
Three courses are as good as ten;--
If Nature can subsist on three,
Thank heaven for three.  Amen!
I always thought cold victual nice;--
My CHOICE would be vanilla-ice.

I care not much for gold or land;--
Give me a mortgage here and there,--
Some good bank-stock,--some note of hand,
Or trifling railroad share;--
I only ask that Fortune send
A LITTLE more than I shall spend.

Honors are silly toys, I know,
And titles are but empty names;--
I would, PERHAPS, be Plenipo,--
But only near St. James;--
I'm very sure I should not care
To fill our Gubernator's chair.

Jewels are baubles; 'tis a sin
To care for such unfruitful things;--
One good-sized diamond in a pin,--
Some, NOT SO LARGE, in rings,--
A ruby and a pearl, or so,
Will do for me;--I laugh at show.

My dame should dress in cheap attire;
(Good, heavy silks are never dear;)--
I own perhaps I MIGHT desire
Some shawls of true cashmere,--
Some marrowy crapes of China silk,
Like wrinkled skins on scalded milk.

I would not have the horse I drive
So fast that folks must stop and stare
An easy gait--two, forty-five--
Suits me; I do not care;--
Perhaps, for just a SINGLE SPURT,
Some seconds less would do no hurt.

Of pictures, I should like to own
Titians and Raphaels three or four,--
I love so much their style and tone,--
One Turner, and no more,--
(A landscape,--foreground golden dirt
The sunshine painted with a squirt.)

Of books but few,--some fifty score
For daily use, and bound for wear;
The rest upon an upper floor;--
Some LITTLE luxury THERE
Of red morocco's gilded gleam,
And vellum rich as country cream.

Busts, cameos, gems,--such things as these,
Which others often show for pride,
_I_ value for their power to please,
And selfish churls deride;--
ONE Stradivarius, I confess,
TWO Meerschaums, I would fain possess.

Wealth's wasteful tricks I will not learn,
Nor ape the glittering upstart fool;--
Shall not carved tables serve my turn,
But ALL must be of buhl?
Give grasping pomp its double share,--
I ask but ONE recumbent chair.

Thus humble let me live and die,
Nor long for Midas' golden touch,
If Heaven more generous gifts deny,
I shall not miss them MUCH,--
Too grateful for the blessing lent
Of simple tastes and mind content!


MY LAST WALK WITH THE SCHOOLMISTRESS.
(A Parenthesis.)

I can't say just how many walks she and I had taken together before
this one.  I found the effect of going out every morning was
decidedly favorable on her health.  Two pleasing dimples, the
places for which were just marked when she came, played, shadowy,
in her freshening cheeks when she smiled and nodded good-morning to
me from the school-house-steps.

I am afraid I did the greater part of the talking.  At any rate, if
I should try to report all that I said during the first half-dozen
walks we took together, I fear that I might receive a gentle hint
from my friends the publishers, that a separate volume, at my own
risk and expense, would be the proper method of bringing them
before the public.

--I would have a woman as true as Death.  At the first real lie
which works from the heart outward, she should be tenderly
chloroformed into a better world, where she can have an angel for a
governess, and feed on strange fruits which will make her all over
again, even to her bones and marrow.--Whether gifted with the
accident of beauty or not, she should have been moulded in the
rose-red clay of Love, before the breath of life made a moving
mortal of her.  Love-capacity is a congenital endowment; and I
think, after a while, one gets to know the warm-hued natures it
belongs to from the pretty pipe-clay counterfeits of them.--Proud
she may be, in the sense of respecting herself; but pride in the
sense of contemning others less gifted than herself, deserves the
two lowest circles of a vulgar woman's Inferno, where the
punishments are Smallpox and Bankruptcy.--She who nips off the end
of a brittle courtesy, as one breaks the tip of an icicle, to
bestow upon those whom she ought cordially and kindly to recognize,
proclaims the fact that she comes not merely of low blood, but of
bad blood.  Consciousness of unquestioned position makes people
gracious in proper measure to all; but if a woman puts on airs with
her real equals, she has something about herself or her family she
is ashamed of, or ought to be.  Middle, and more than middle-aged
people, who know family histories, generally see through it.  An
official of standing was rude to me once.  Oh, that is the maternal
grandfather,--said a wise old friend to me,--he was a boor.--Better
too few words, from the woman we love, than too many:  while she is
silent, Nature is working for her; while she talks, she is working
for herself.--Love is sparingly soluble in the words of men;
therefore they speak much of it; but one syllable of woman's speech
can dissolve more of it than a man's heart can hold.

--Whether I said any or all of these things to the schoolmistress,
or not,--whether I stole them out of Lord Bacon,--whether I cribbed
them from Balzac,--whether I dipped them from the ocean of
Tupperian wisdom,--or whether I have just found them in my head,
laid there by that solemn fowl, Experience, (who, according to my
observation, cackles oftener than she drops real live eggs,) I
cannot say.  Wise men have said more foolish things,--and foolish
men, I don't doubt, have said as wise things.  Anyhow, the
schoolmistress and I had pleasant walks and long talks, all of
which I do not feel bound to report.

--You are a stranger to me, Ma'am.--I don't doubt you would like to
know all I said to the schoolmistress.--I sha'n't do it;--I had
rather get the publishers to return the money you have invested in
this.  Besides, I have forgotten a good deal of it.  I shall tell
only what I like of what I remember.

--My idea was, in the first place, to search out the picturesque
spots which the city affords a sight of, to those who have eyes.  I
know a good many, and it was a pleasure to look at them in company
with my young friend.  There were the shrubs and flowers in the
Franklin-Place front-yards or borders; Commerce is just putting his
granite foot upon them.  Then there are certain small seraglio-
gardens, into which one can get a peep through the crevices of high
fences,--one in Myrtle Street, or backing on it,--here and there
one at the North and South Ends.  Then the great elms in Essex
Street.  Then the stately horse-chestnuts in that vacant lot in
Chambers Street, which hold their outspread hands over your head,
(as I said in my poem the other day,) and look as if they were
whispering, "May grace, mercy, and peace be with you!"--and the
rest of that benediction.  Nay, there are certain patches of
ground, which, having lain neglected for a time, Nature, who always
has her pockets full of seeds, and holes in all her pockets, has
covered with hungry plebeian growths, which fight for life with
each other, until some of them get broad-leaved and succulent, and
you have a coarse vegetable tapestry which Raphael would not have
disdained to spread over the foreground of his masterpiece.  The
Professor pretends that he found such a one in Charles Street,
which, in its dare-devil impudence of rough-and-tumble vegetation,
beat the pretty-behaved flower-beds of the Public Garden as
ignominiously as a group of young tatterdemalions playing
pitch-and-toss beats a row of Sunday-school-boys with their
teacher at their head.

But then the Professor has one of his burrows in that region, and
puts everything in high colors relating to it.  That is his way
about everything.  I hold any man cheap,--he said,--of whom nothing
stronger can be uttered than that all his geese are swans.--How is
that, Professor?--said I;--I should have set you down for one of
that sort.--Sir,--said he,--I am proud to say, that Nature has so
far enriched me, that I cannot own so much as a duck without seeing
in it as pretty a swan as ever swam the basin in the garden of the
Luxembourg.  And the Professor showed the whites of his eyes
devoutly, like one returning thanks after a dinner of many courses.

I don't know anything sweeter than this leaking in of Nature
through all the cracks in the walls and floors of cities.  You heap
up a million tons of hewn rocks on a square mile or two of earth
which was green once.  The trees look down from the hill-sides and
ask each other, as they stand on tiptoe,--"What are these people
about?"  And the small herbs at their feet look up and whisper
back,--"We will go and see."  So the small herbs pack themselves up
in the least possible bundles, and wait until the wind steals to
them at night and whispers, "Come with me."  Then they go softly
with it into the great city,--one to a cleft in the pavement, one
to a spout on the roof, one to a seam in the marbles over a rich
gentleman's bones, and one to the grave without a stone where
nothing but a man is buried,--and there they grow, looking down on
the generations of men from mouldy roofs, looking up from between
the less-trodden pavements, looking out through iron cemetery-
railings.  Listen to them, when there is only a light breath
stirring, and you will hear them saying to each other,--"Wait
awhile!"  The words run along the telegraph of those narrow green
lines that border the roads leading from the city, until they reach
the slope of the hills, and the trees repeat in low murmurs to each
other,--"Wait awhile!"  By-and-by the flow of life in the streets
ebbs, and the old leafy inhabitants--the smaller tribes always in
front--saunter in, one by one, very careless seemingly, but very
tenacious, until they swarm so that the great stones gape from each
other with the crowding of their roots, and the feldspar begins to
be picked out of the granite to find them food.  At last the trees
take up their solemn line of march, and never rest until they have
encamped in the market-place.  Wait long enough and you will find
an old doting oak hugging a huge worn block in its yellow
underground arms; that was the cornerstone of the State-House.  Oh,
so patient she is, this imperturbable Nature!

--Let us cry!--

But all this has nothing to do with my walks and talks with the
schoolmistress.  I did not say that I would not tell you something
about them.  Let me alone, and I shall talk to you more than I
ought to, probably.  We never tell our secrets to people that pump
for them.

Books we talked about, and education.  It was her duty to know
something of these, and of course she did.  Perhaps I was somewhat
more learned than she, but I found that the difference between her
reading and mine was like that of a man's and a woman's dusting a
library.  The man flaps about with a bunch of feathers; the woman
goes to work softly with a cloth.  She does not raise half the
dust, nor fill her own eyes and mouth with it,--but she goes into
all the corners, and attends to the leaves as much as the covers.
--Books are the NEGATIVE pictures of thought, and the more sensitive
the mind that receives their images, the more nicely the finest
lines are reproduced.  A woman, (of the right kind,) reading after
a man, follows him as Ruth followed the reapers of Boaz, and her
gleanings are often the finest of the wheat.

But it was in talking of Life that we came most clearly together.
I thought I knew something about that,--that I could speak or write
about it somewhat to the purpose.

To take up this fluid earthly being of ours as a sponge sucks up
water,--to be steeped and soaked in its realities as a hide fills
its pores lying seven years in a tan-pit,--to have winnowed every
wave of it as a mill-wheel works up the stream that runs through
the flume upon its float-boards,--to have curled up in the keenest
spasms and flattened out in the laxest languors of this breathing-
sickness, which keeps certain parcels of matter uneasy for three or
four score years,--to have fought all the devils and clasped all
the angels of its delirium,--and then, just at the point when the
white-hot passions have cooled down to cherry-red, plunge our
experience into the ice-cold stream of some human language or
other, one might think would end in a rhapsody with something of
spring and temper in it.  All this I thought my power and province.

The schoolmistress had tried life, too.  Once in a while one meets
with a single soul greater than all the living pageant which passes
before it.  As the pale astronomer sits in his study with sunken
eyes and thin fingers, and weighs Uranus or Neptune as in a
balance, so there are meek, slight women who have weighed all which
this planetary life can offer, and hold it like a bauble in the
palm of their slender hands.  This was one of them.  Fortune had
left her, sorrow had baptized her; the routine of labor and the
loneliness of almost friendless city-life were before her.  Yet, as
I looked upon her tranquil face, gradually regaining a cheerfulness
which was often sprightly, as she became interested in the various
matters we talked about and places we visited, I saw that eye and
lip and every shifting lineament were made for love,--unconscious
of their sweet office as yet, and meeting the cold aspect of Duty
with the natural graces which were meant for the reward of nothing
less than the Great Passion.

--I never addressed one word of love to the schoolmistress in the
course of these pleasant walks.  It seemed to me that we talked of
everything but love on that particular morning.  There was,
perhaps, a little more timidity and hesitancy on my part than I
have commonly shown among our people at the boarding-house.  In
fact, I considered myself the master at the breakfast-table; but,
somehow, I could not command myself just then so well as usual.
The truth is, I had secured a passage to Liverpool in the steamer
which was to leave at noon,--with the condition, however, of being
released in case circumstances occurred to detain me.  The
schoolmistress knew nothing about all this, of course, as yet.

It was on the Common that we were walking.  The MALL, or boulevard
of our Common, you know, has various branches leading from it in
different directions.  One of these runs down from opposite Joy
Street southward across the whole length of the Common to Boylston
Street.  We called it the long path, and were fond of it.

I felt very weak indeed (though of a tolerably robust habit) as we
came opposite the head of this path on that morning.  I think I
tried to speak twice without making myself distinctly audible.  At
last I got out the question,--Will you take the long path with me?
--Certainly,--said the schoolmistress,--with much pleasure.--Think,
--I said,--before you answer; if you take the long path with
me now, I shall interpret it that we are to part no more!--The
schoolmistress stepped back with a sudden movement, as if an arrow
had struck her.

One of the long granite blocks used as seats was hard by,--the one
you may still see close by the Gingko-tree.--Pray, sit down,--I
said.--No, no, she answered, softly,--I will walk the LONG PATH
with you!

--The old gentleman who sits opposite met us walking, arm in arm,
about the middle of the long path, and said, very charmingly,
--"Good morning, my dears!"



CHAPTER XII



[I did not think it probable that I should have a great many more
talks with our company, and therefore I was anxious to get as much
as I could into every conversation.  That is the reason why you
will find some odd, miscellaneous facts here, which I wished to
tell at least once, as I should not have a chance to tell them
habitually at our breakfast-table.--We're very free and easy, you
know; we don't read what we don't like.  Our parish is so large,
one can't pretend to preach to all the pews at once.  One can't be
all the time trying to do the best of one's best if a company works
a steam fire-engine, the firemen needn't be straining themselves
all day to squirt over the top of the flagstaff.  Let them wash
some of those lower-story windows a little.  Besides, there is no
use in our quarrelling now, as you will find out when you get
through this paper.]

--Travel, according to my experience, does not exactly correspond
to the idea one gets of it out of most books of travels.  I am
thinking of travel as it was when I made the Grand Tour, especially
in Italy.  Memory is a net; one finds it full of fish when he takes
it from the brook; but a dozen miles of water have run through it
without sticking.  I can prove some facts about travelling by a
story or two.  There are certain principles to be assumed,--such
as these:--He who is carried by horses must deal with rogues.
--To-day's dinner subtends a larger visual angle than yesterday's
revolution.  A mote in my eye is bigger to me than the biggest of
Dr. Gould's private planets.--Every traveller is a self-taught
entomologist.--Old jokes are dynamometers of mental tension; an old
joke tells better among friends travelling than at home,--which
shows that their minds are in a state of diminished, rather than
increased vitality.  There was a story about "strahps to your
pahnts," which was vastly funny to us fellows--on the road from
Milan to Venice.--Caelum, non animum,--travellers change their
guineas, but not their characters.  The bore is the same, eating
dates under the cedars of Lebanon, as over a plate of baked beans
in Beacon Street.--Parties of travellers have a morbid instinct for
"establishing raws" upon each other.--A man shall sit down with his
friend at the foot of the Great Pyramid and they will take up the
question they had been talking about under "the great elm," and
forget all about Egypt.  When I was crossing the Po, we were all
fighting about the propriety of one fellow's telling another that
his argument was absurd; one maintaining it to be a perfectly
admissible logical term, as proved by the phrase "reductio ad
absurdum;" the rest badgering him as a conversational bully.
Mighty little we troubled ourselves for Padus, the Po, "a river
broader and more rapid than the Rhone," and the times when Hannibal
led his grim Africans to its banks, and his elephants thrust their
trunks into the yellow waters over which that pendulum ferry-boat
was swinging back and forward every ten minutes!

--Here are some of those reminiscences, with morals prefixed, or
annexed, or implied.

Lively emotions very commonly do not strike us full in front, but
obliquely from the side; a scene or incident in UNDRESS often
affects us more than one in full costume.


"Is this the mighty ocean?--is this all?"


says the Princess in Gebir.  The rush that should have flooded my
soul in the Coliseum did not come.  But walking one day in the
fields about the city, I stumbled over a fragment of broken
masonry, and lo! the World's Mistress in her stone girdle--alta
maenia Romae--rose before me and whitened my cheek with her pale
shadow as never before or since.

I used very often, when coming home from my morning's work at one
of the public institutions of Paris, to stop in at the dear old
church of St. Etienne du Mont.  The tomb of St. Genevieve,
surrounded by burning candles and votive tablets, was there; the
mural tablet of Jacobus Benignus Winslow was there; there was a
noble organ with carved figures; the pulpit was borne on the oaken
shoulders of a stooping Samson; and there was a marvellous
staircase like a coil of lace.  These things I mention from memory,
but not all of them together impressed me so much as an inscription
on a small slab of marble fixed in one of the walls.  It told how
this church of St. Stephen was repaired and beautified in the year
16**, and how, during the celebration of its reopening, two girls
of the parish (filles de la paroisse) fell from the gallery,
carrying a part of the balustrade with them, to the pavement, but
by a miracle escaped uninjured.  Two young girls, nameless, but
real presences to my imagination, as much as when they came
fluttering down on the tiles with a cry that outscreamed the
sharpest treble in the Te Deum.  (Look at Carlyle's article on
Boswell, and see how he speaks of the poor young woman Johnson
talked with in the streets one evening.)  All the crowd gone but
these two "filles de la paroisse,"--gone as utterly as the dresses
they wore, as the shoes that were on their feet, as the bread and
meat that were in the market on that day.

Not the great historical events, but the personal incidents that
call up single sharp pictures of some human being in its pang or
struggle, reach us most nearly.  I remember the platform at Berne,
over the parapet of which Theobald Weinzapfli's restive horse
sprung with him and landed him more than a hundred feet beneath in
the lower town, not dead, but sorely broken, and no longer a wild
youth, but God's servant from that day forward.  I have forgotten
the famous bears, and all else.--I remember the Percy lion on the
bridge over the little river at Alnwick,--the leaden lion with his
tail stretched out straight like a pump-handle,--and why?  Because
of the story of the village boy who must fain bestride the leaden
tail, standing out over the water,--which breaking, he dropped into
the stream far below, and was taken out an idiot for the rest of
his life.

Arrow-heads must be brought to a sharp point, and the guillotine-
axe must have a slanting edge.  Something intensely human, narrow,
and definate pierces to the seat of our sensibilities more readily
than huge occurrences and catastrophes.  A nail will pick a lock
that defies hatchet and hammer.  "The Royal George" went down with
all her crew, and Cowper wrote an exquisitely simple poem about it;
but the leaf which holds it is smooth, while that which bears the
lines on his mother's portrait is blistered with tears.

My telling these recollections sets me thinking of others of the
same kind which strike the imagination, especially when one is
still young.  You remember the monument in Devizes market to the
woman struck dead with a lie in her mouth.  I never saw that, but
it is in the books.  Here is one I never heard mentioned;--if any
of the "Note and Query" tribe can tell the story, I hope they will.
Where is this monument?  I was riding on an English stage-coach
when we passed a handsome marble column (as I remember it) of
considerable size and pretensions.--What is that?--I said.--That,
--answered the coachman,--is THE HANGMAN'S PILLAR.  Then he told me
how a man went out one night, many years ago, to steal sheep.  He
caught one, tied its legs together, passed the rope over his head,
and started for home.  In climbing a fence, the rope slipped,
caught him by the neck, and strangled him.  Next morning he was
found hanging dead on one side of the fence and the sheep on the
other; in memory whereof the lord of the manor caused this monument
to be erected as a warning to all who love mutton better than
virtue.  I will send a copy of this record to him or her who shall
first set me right about this column and its locality.

And telling over these old stories reminds me that I have something
which may interest architects and perhaps some other persons.  I
once ascended the spire of Strasburg Cathedral, which is the
highest, I think, in Europe.  It is a shaft of stone filigree-work,
frightfully open, so that the guide puts his arms behind you to
keep you from falling.  To climb it is a noonday nightmare, and to
think of having climbed it crisps all the fifty-six joints of one's
twenty digits.  While I was on it, "pinnacled dim in the intense
inane," a strong wind was blowing, and I felt sure that the spire
was rocking.  It swayed back and forward like a stalk of rye or a
cat-o'nine-tails (bulrush) with a bobolink on it.  I mentioned it
to the guide, and he said that the spire did really swing back and
forward,--I think he said some feet.

Keep any line of knowledge ten years and some other line will
intersect it.  Long afterwards I was hunting out a paper of
Dumeril's in an old journal,--the "Magazin Encyclopedique" for l'an
troisieme, (1795,) when I stumbled upon a brief article on the
vibrations of the spire of Strasburg Cathedral.  A man can shake it
so that the movement shall be shown in a vessel of water nearly
seventy feet below the summit, and higher up the vibration is like
that of an earthquake.  I have seen one of those wretched wooden
spires with which we very shabbily finish some of our stone
churches (thinking that the lidless blue eye of heaven cannot tell
the counterfeit we try to pass on it,) swinging like a reed, in a
wind, but one would hardly think of such a thing's happening in a
stone spire.  Does the Bunker-Hill Monument bend in the blast like
a blade of grass?  I suppose so.

You see, of course, that I am talking in a cheap way;--perhaps we
will have some philosophy by and by;--let me work out this thin
mechanical vein.--I have something more to say about trees.  I have
brought down this slice of hemlock to show you.  Tree blew down in
my woods (that were) in 1852.  Twelve feet and a half round, fair
girth;--nine feet, where I got my section, higher up.  This is a
wedge, going to the centre, of the general shape of a slice of
apple-pie in a large and not opulent family.  Length, about
eighteen inches.  I have studied the growth of this tree by its
rings, and it is curious.  Three hundred and forty-two rings.
Started, therefore, about 1510.  The thickness of the rings tells
the rate at which it grew.  For five or six years the rate was
slow,--then rapid for twenty years.  A little before the year 1550
it began to grow very slowly, and so continued for about seventy
years.  In 1620 it took a new start and grew fast until 1714 then
for the most part slowly until 1786, when it started again and grew
pretty well and uniformly until within the last dozen years, when
it seems to have got on sluggishly.

Look here.  Here are some human lives laid down against the periods
of its growth, to which they corresponded.  This is Shakspeare's.
The tree was seven inches in diameter when he was born; ten inches
when he died.  A little less than ten inches when Milton was born;
seventeen when he died.  Then comes a long interval, and this
thread marks out Johnson's life, during which the tree increased
from twenty-two to twenty-nine inches in diameter.  Here is the
span of Napoleon's career;--the tree doesn't seem to have minded
it.

I never saw the man yet who was not startled at looking on this
section.  I have seen many wooden preachers,--never one like this.
How much more striking would be the calendar counted on the rings
of one of those awful trees which were standing when Christ was on
earth, and where that brief mortal life is chronicled with the
stolid apathy of vegetable being, which remembers all human history
as a thing of yesterday in its own dateless existence!

I have something more to say about elms.  A relative tells me there
is one of great glory in Andover, near Bradford.  I have some
recollections of the former place, pleasant and other.  [I wonder
if the old Seminary clock strikes as slowly as it used to.  My
room-mate thought, when he first came, it was the bell tolling
deaths, and people's ages, as they do in the country.  He swore
--(ministers' sons get so familiar with good words that they are apt
to handle them carelessly)--that the children were dying by the
dozen, of all ages, from one to twelve, and ran off next day in
recess, when it began to strike eleven, but was caught before the
clock got through striking.]  At the foot of "the hill," down in
town, is, or was, a tidy old elm, which was said to have been
hooped with iron to protect it from Indian tomahawks, (Credat
Hahnemannus,) and to have grown round its hoops and buried them in
its wood.  Of course, this is not the tree my relative means.

Also, I have a very pretty letter from Norwich, in Connecticut,
telling me of two noble elms which are to be seen in that town.
One hundred and twenty-seven feet from bough-end to bough-end!
What do you say to that?  And gentle ladies beneath it, that love
it and celebrate its praises!  And that in a town of such supreme,
audacious, Alpine loveliness as Norwich!--Only the dear people
there must learn to call it Norridge, and not be misled by the mere
accident of spelling.

NorWICH.
PorCHmouth.
CincinnatAH.

What a sad picture of our civilization!

I did not speak to you of the great tree on what used to be the
Colman farm, in Deerfield, simply because I had not seen it for
many years, and did not like to trust my recollection.  But I had
it in memory, and even noted down, as one of the finest trees in
symmetry and beauty I had ever seen.  I have received a document,
signed by two citizens of a neighboring town, certified by the
postmaster and a selectman, and these again corroborated,
reinforced, and sworn to by a member of that extraordinary
college-class to which it is the good fortune of my friend the
Professor to belong, who, though he has FORMERLY been a member of
Congress, is, I believe, fully worthy of confidence.  The tree
"girts" eighteen and a half feet, and spreads over a hundred, and is
a real beauty. I hope to meet my friend under its branches yet; if we
don't have "youth at the prow," we will have "pleasure at the 'elm."

And just now, again, I have got a letter about some grand willows
in Maine, and another about an elm in Wayland, but too late for
anything but thanks.

[And this leads me to say, that I have received a great many
communications, in prose and verse since I began printing these
notes.  The last came this very morning, in the shape of a neat and
brief poem, from New Orleans.  I could not make any of them public,
though sometimes requested to do so.  Some of them have given me
great pleasure, and encouraged me to believe I had friends whose
faces I had never seen.  If you are pleased with anything a writer
says, and doubt whether to tell him of it, do not hesitate; a
pleasant word is a cordial to one, who perhaps thinks he is tiring
you, and so becomes tired himself.  I purr very loud over a good,
honest letter that says pretty things to me.]

--Sometimes very young persons send communications which they want
forwarded to editors; and these young persons do not always seem to
have right conceptions of these same editors, and of the public,
and of themselves.  Here is a letter I wrote to one of these young
folks, but, on the whole, thought it best not to send.  It is not
fair to single out one for such sharp advice, where there are
hundreds that are in need of it.


Dear Sir,--You seem to be somewhat, but not a great deal, wiser
than I was at your age.  I don't wish to be understood as saying
too much, for I think, without committing myself to any opinion on
my present state, that I was not a Solomon at that stage of
development.

You long to "leap at a single bound into celebrity."  Nothing is so
common-place as to wish to be remarkable.  Fame usually comes to
those who are thinking about something else,--very rarely to those
who say to themselves, "Go to, now, let us be a celebrated
individual!"  The struggle for fame, as such, commonly ends in
notoriety;--that ladder is easy to climb, but it leads to the
pillory which is crowded with fools who could not hold their
tongues and rogues who could not hide their tricks.

If you have the consciousness of genius, do something to show it.
The world is pretty quick, nowadays, to catch the flavor of true
originality; if you write anything remarkable, the magazines and
newspapers will find you out, as the school-boys find out where the
ripe apples and pears are.  Produce anything really good, and an
intelligent editor will jump at it.  Don't flatter yourself that
any article of yours is rejected because you are unknown to fame.
Nothing pleases an editor more than to get anything worth having
from a new hand.  There is always a dearth of really fine articles
for a first-rate journal; for, of a hundred pieces received, ninety
are at or below the sea-level; some have water enough, but no head;
some head enough, but no water; only two or three are from full
reservoirs, high up that hill which is so hard to climb.

You may have genius.  The contrary is of course probable, but it is
not demonstrated.  If you have, the world wants you more than you
want it.  It has not only a desire, but a passion, for every spark
of genius that shows itself among us; there is not a bull-calf in
our national pasture that can bleat a rhyme but it is ten to one,
among his friends, and no takers, that he is the real, genuine,
no-mistake Osiris.

Qu'est ce qu'il a fait?  What has he done?  That was Napoleon's
test.  What have you done?  Turn up the faces of your picture-
cards, my boy!  You need not make mouths at the public because it
has not accepted you at your own fancy-valuation.  Do the prettiest
thing you can and wait your time.

For the verses you send me, I will not say they are hopeless, and I
dare not affirm that they show promise.  I am not an editor, but I
know the standard of some editors.  You must not expect to "leap
with a single bound" into the society of those whom it is not
flattery to call your betters.  When "The Pactolian" has paid you
for a copy of verses,--(I can furnish you a list of alliterative
signatures, beginning with Annie Aureole and ending with Zoe
Zenith,)--when "The Rag-bag" has stolen your piece, after carefully
scratching your name out,--when "The Nut-cracker" has thought you
worth shelling, and strung the kernel of your cleverest poem,
--then, and not till then, you may consider the presumption against
you, from the fact of your rhyming tendency, as called in question,
and let our friends hear from you, if you think it worth while.
You may possibly think me too candid, and even accuse me of
incivility; but let me assure you that I am not half so
plain-spoken as Nature, nor half so rude as Time.  If you prefer the
long jolting of public opinion to the gentle touch of friendship, try
it like a man.  Only remember this,--that, if a bushel of potatoes is
shaken in a market-cart without springs to it, the small potatoes
always get to the bottom.  Believe me, etc., etc.


I always think of verse-writers, when I am in this vein; for these
are by far the most exacting, eager, self-weighing, restless,
querulous, unreasonable literary persons one is like to meet with.
Is a young man in the habit of writing verses?  Then the
presumption is that he is an inferior person.  For, look you, there
are at least nine chances in ten that he writes POOR verses.  Now
the habit of chewing on rhymes without sense and soul to match them
is, like that of using any other narcotic, at once a proof of
feebleness and a debilitating agent.  A young man can get rid of
the presumption against him afforded by his writing verses only by
convincing us that they are verses worth writing.

All this sounds hard and rough, but, observe, it is not addressed
to any individual, and of course does not refer to any reader of
these pages.  I would always treat any given young person passing
through the meteoric showers which rain down on the brief period of
adolescence with great tenderness.  God forgive us if we ever speak
harshly to young creatures on the strength of these ugly truths,
and so sooner or later, smite some tender-souled poet or poetess on
the lips who might have sung the world into sweet trances, had we
not silenced the matin-song in its first low breathings!  Just as
my heart yearns over the unloved, just so it sorrows for
the ungifted who are doomed to the pangs of an undeceived
self-estimate.  I have always tried to be gentle with the most
hopeless cases.  My experience, however, has not been encouraging.

--X. Y., aet. 18, a cheaply-got-up youth, with narrow jaws, and
broad, bony, cold, red hands, having been laughed at by the girls
in his village, and "got the mitten" (pronounced mittIn) two or
three times, falls to souling and controlling, and youthing and
truthing, in the newspapers.  Sends me some strings of verses,
candidates for the Orthopedic Infirmary, all of them, in which I
learn for the millionth time one of the following facts:  either
that something about a chime is sublime, or that something about
time is sublime, or that something about a chime is concerned with
time, or that something about a rhyme is sublime or concerned with
time or with a chime.  Wishes my opinion of the same, with advice
as to his future course.

What shall I do about it?  Tell him the whole truth, and send him a
ticket of admission to the Institution for Idiots and Feeble-minded
Youth?  One doesn't like to be cruel,--and yet one hates to lie.
Therefore one softens down the ugly central fact of donkeyism,
--recommends study of good models,--that writing verse should be an
incidental occupation only, not interfering with the hoe, the
needle, the lapstone, or the ledger,--and, above all that there
should be no hurry in printing what is written.  Not the least use
in all this.  The poetaster who has tasted type is done for.  He is
like the man who has once been a candidate for the Presidency.  He
feeds on the madder of his delusion all his days, and his very
bones grow red with the glow of his foolish fancy.  One of these
young brains is like a bunch of India crackers; once touch fire to
it and it is best to keep hands off until it has done popping,--if
it ever stops.  I have two letters on file; one is a pattern of
adulation, the other of impertinence.  My reply to the first,
containing the best advice I could give, conveyed in courteous
language, had brought out the second.  There was some sport in
this, but Dulness is not commonly a game fish, and only sulks after
he is struck.  You may set it down as a truth which admits of few
exceptions, that those who ask your OPINION really want your
PRAISE, and will be contented with nothing less.

There is another kind of application to which editors, or those
supposed to have access to them, are liable, and which often proves
trying and painful.  One is appealed to in behalf of some person in
needy circumstances who wishes to make a living by the pen.  A
manuscript accompanying the letter is offered for publication.  It
is not commonly brilliant, too often lamentably deficient.  If
Rachel's saying is true, that "fortune is the measure of
intelligence," then poverty is evidence of limited capacity which
it too frequently proves to be, notwithstanding a noble exception
here and there.  Now an editor is a person under a contract with
the public to furnish them with the best things he can afford for
his money.  Charity shown by the publication of an inferior article
would be like the generosity of Claude Duval and the other
gentlemen highwaymen, who pitied the poor so much they robbed the
rich to have the means of relieving them.

Though I am not and never was an editor, I know something of the
trials to which they are submitted.  They have nothing to do but to
develope enormous calluses at every point of contact with
authorship.  Their business is not a matter of sympathy, but of
intellect.  They must reject the unfit productions of those whom
they long to befriend, because it would be a profligate charity to
accept them.  One cannot burn his house down to warm the hands even
of the fatherless and the widow.


THE PROFESSOR UNDER CHLOROFORM.

--You haven't heard about my friend the Professor's first
experiment in the use of anaesthetics, have you?

He was mightily pleased with the reception of that poem of his
about the chaise.  He spoke to me once or twice about another poem
of similar character he wanted to read me, which I told him I would
listen to and criticize.

One day, after dinner, he came in with his face tied up, looking
very red in the cheeks and heavy about the eyes.--Hy'r'ye?--he
said, and made for an arm-chair, in which he placed first his hat
and then his person, going smack through the crown of the former as
neatly as they do the trick at the circus.  The Professor jumped at
the explosion as if he had sat down on one of those small CALTHROPS
our grandfathers used to sow round in the grass when there were
Indians about,--iron stars, each ray a rusty thorn an inch and a
half long,--stick through moccasins into feet,--cripple 'em on the
spot, and give 'em lockjaw in a day or two.

At the same time he let off one of those big words which lie at the
bottom of the best man's vocabulary, but perhaps never turn up in
his life,--just as every man's hair MAY stand on end, but in most
men it never does.

After he had got calm, he pulled out a sheet or two of manuscript,
together with a smaller scrap, on which, as he said, he had just
been writing an introduction or prelude to the main performance.  A
certain suspicion had come into my mind that the Professor was not
quite right, which was confirmed by the way he talked; but I let
him begin.  This is the way he read it:-

Prelude.

I'm the fellah that tole one day
The tale of the won'erful one-hoss-shay.
Wan' to hear another?  Say.
--Funny, wasn'it?  Made ME laugh,--
I'm too modest, I am, by half,--
Made me laugh'S THOUGH I SH'D SPLIT,--
Cahn' a fellah like fellah's own wit?--
--Fellahs keep sayin',--"Well, now that's nice;
Did it once, but cahn' do it twice."--
Don' you b'lieve the'z no more fat;
Lots in the kitch'n 'z good 'z that.
Fus'-rate throw, 'n' no mistake,--
Han' us the props for another shake;--
Know I'll try, 'n' guess I'll win;
Here sh' goes for hit 'm ag'in!

Here I thought it necessary to interpose.--Professor,--I said,--you
are inebriated.  The style of what you call your "Prelude" shows
that it was written under cerebral excitement.  Your articulation
is confused.  You have told me three times in succession, in
exactly the same words, that I was the only true friend you had in
the world that you would unbutton your heart to.  You smell
distinctly and decidedly of spirits.--I spoke, and paused; tender,
but firm.

Two large tears orbed themselves beneath the Professor's lids,--in
obedience to the principle of gravitation celebrated in that
delicious bit of bladdery bathos, "The very law that moulds a
tear," with which the "Edinburgh Review" attempted to put down
Master George Gordon when that young man was foolishly trying to
make himself conspicuous.

One of these tears peeped over the edge of the lid until it lost
its balance,--slid an inch and waited for reinforcements,--swelled
again,--rolled down a little further,--stopped,--moved on,--and at
last fell on the back of the Professor's hand.  He held it up for
me to look at, and lifted his eyes, brimful, till they met mine.

I couldn't stand it,--I always break down when folks cry in my
face,--so I hugged him, and said he was a dear old boy, and asked
him kindly what was the matter with him, and what made him smell so
dreadfully strong of spirits.

Upset his alcohol lamp,--he said,--and spilt the alcohol on his
legs.  That was it.--But what had he been doing to get his head
into such a state?--had he really committed an excess?  What was
the matter?--Then it came out that he had been taking chloroform to
have a tooth out, which had left him in a very queer state, in
which he had written the "Prelude" given above, and under the
influence of which he evidently was still.

I took the manuscript from his hands and read the following
continuation of the lines he had begun to read me, while he made up
for two or three nights' lost sleep as he best might.


PARSON TURELL'S LEGACY:
OR THE PRESIDENT'S OLD ARM-CHAIR.
A MATHEMATICAL STORY.

Facts respecting an old arm-chair.
At Cambridge.  Is kept in the College there.
Seems but little the worse for wear.
That's remarkable when I say
It was old in President Holyoke's day.
(One of his boys, perhaps you know,
Died, AT ONE HUNDRED, years ago.)
HE took lodging for rain or shine
Under green bed-clothes in '69.

Know old Cambridge?  Hope you do.--
Born there?  Don't say so!  I was, too.
(Born in a house with a gambrel-roof,--
Standing still, if you must have proof.--
"Gambrel?--Gambrel?"--Let me beg
You'll look at a horse's hinder leg,--
First great angle above the hoof,--
That's the gambrel; hence gambrel-roof.)
--Nicest place that ever was seen,--
Colleges red and Common green,
Sidewalks brownish with trees between.
Sweetest spot beneath the skies
When the canker-worms don't rise,--
When the dust, that sometimes flies
Into your mouth and ears and eyes.
In a quiet slumber lies,
NOT in the shape of unbaked pies
Such as barefoot children prize.

A kind of harber it seems to be,
Facing the flow of a boundless sea.
Rows of gray old Tutors stand
Ranged like rocks above the sand;
Rolling beneath them, soft and green,
Breaks the tide of bright sixteen,--
One wave, two waves, three waves, four,
Sliding up the sparkling floor;
Then it ebbs to flow no more,
Wandering off from shore to shore
With its freight of golden ore!
--Pleasant place for boys to play;--
Better keep your girls away;
Hearts get rolled as pebbles do
Which countless fingering waves pursue,
And every classic beach is strown
With heart-shaped pebbles of blood-red stone.

But this is neither here nor there;--
I'm talking about an old arm-chair.
You've heard, no doubt, of PARSON TURELL?
Over at Medford he used to dwell;
Married one of the Mathers' folk;
Got with his wife a chair of oak,--
Funny old chair, with seat like wedge,
Sharp behind and broad front edge,--
One of the oddest of human things,
Turned all over with knobs and rings,--
But heavy, and wide, and deep, and grand,--
Fit for the worthies of the land,--
Chief-Justice Sewall a cause to try in,
Or Cotton Mather to sit--and lie--in.
--Parson Turell bequeathed the same
To a certain student,--SMITH by name;
These were the terms, as we are told:
"Saide Smith saide Chaire to have and holde;
When he doth graduate, then to passe
To ye oldest Youth in ye Senior Classe.
On Payment of"--(naming a certain sum)--
"By him to whom ye Chaire shall come;
He to ye oldest Senior next,
And soe forever,"--(thus runs the text,)--
"But one Crown lesse then he gave to claime,
That being his Debte for use of same."

SMITH transferred it to one of the BROWNS,
And took his money,--five silver crowns.
BROWN delivered it up to MOORE,
Who paid, it is plain, not five, but four.
MOORE made over the chair to LEE,
Who gave him crowns of silver three.
LEE conveyed it unto DREW,
And now the payment, of course, was two.
DREW gave up the chair to DUNN,--
All he got, as you see, was one.
DUNN released the chair to HALL,
And got by the bargain no crown at all.
--And now it passed to a second BROWN,
Who took it, and likewise CLAIMED A CROWN.
When BROWN conveyed it unto WARE,
Having had one crown, to make it fair,
He paid him two crowns to take the chair;
And WARE, being honest, (as all Wares be,)
He paid one POTTER, who took it, three.
Four got ROBINSON; five got DIX;
JOHNSON primus demanded six;
And so the sum kept gathering still
Till after the battle of Bunker's Hill
--When paper money became so cheap,
Folks wouldn't count it, but said "a heap,"

A certain RICHARDS, the books declare,
(A. M. in '90?  I've looked with care
Through the Triennial,--NAME NOT THERE.)
This person, Richards, was offered then
Eight score pounds, but would have ten;
Nine, I think, was the sum he took,--
Not quite certain,--but see the book.
--By and by the wars were still,
But nothing had altered the Parson's will.
The old arm-chair was solid yet,
But saddled with such a monstrous debt!
Things grew quite too bad to bear,
Paying such sums to get rid of the chair!
But dead men's fingers hold awful tight,
And there was the will in black and white,
Plain enough for a child to spell.
What should be done no man could tell,
For the chair was a kind of nightmare curse,
And every season but made it worse.

As a last resort, to clear the doubt,
They got old GOVERNOR HANCOCK out.
The Governor came, with his Light-horse Troop
And his mounted truckmen, all cock-a-hoop;
Halberds glittered and colors flew,
French horns whinnied and trumpets blew,
The yellow fifes whistled between their teeth
And the bumble-bee bass-drums boomed beneath;
So he rode with all his band,
Till the President met him, cap in hand.
--The Governor "hefted" the crowns, and said,--
"A will is a will, and the Parson's dead."
The Governor hefted the crowns.  Said he,--
"There is your p'int.  And here's my fee.
These are the terms you must fulfil,--
On such conditions I BREAK THE WILL!"
The Governor mentioned what these should be.
(Just wait a minute and then you'll see.)
The President prayed.  Then all was still,
And the Governor rose and BROKE THE WILL!
--"About those conditions?"  Well, now you go
And do as I tell you, and then you'll know.
Once a year, on Commencement-day,
If you'll only take the pains to stay,
You'll see the President in the CHAIR,
Likewise the Governor sitting there.
The President rises; both old and young
May hear his speech in a foreign tongue,
The meaning whereof, as lawyers swear,
Is this:  Can I keep this old arm-chair?
And then his Excellency bows,
As much as to say that he allows.
The Vice-Gub. next is called by name;
He bows like t'other, which means the same.
And all the officers round 'em bow,
As much as to say that THEY allow.
And a lot of parchments about the chair
Are handed to witnesses then and there,
And then the lawyers hold it clear
That the chair is safe for another year.

God bless you, Gentlemen!  Learn to give
Money to colleges while you live.
Don't be silly and think you'll try
To bother the colleges, when you die,
With codicil this, and codicil that,
That Knowledge may starve while Law grows fat;
For there never was pitcher that wouldn't spill,
And there's always a flaw in a donkey's will!


--Hospitality is a good deal a matter of latitude, I suspect.  The
shade of a palm-tree serves an African for a hut; his dwelling is
all door and no walls; everybody can come in.  To make a morning
call on an Esquimaux acquaintance, one must creep through a long
tunnel; his house is all walls and no door, except such a one as an
apple with a worm-hole has.  One might, very probably, trace a
regular gradation between these two extremes.  In cities where the
evenings are generally hot, the people have porches at their doors,
where they sit, and this is, of course, a provocative to the
interchange of civilities.  A good deal, which in colder regions is
ascribed to mean dispositions, belongs really to mean temperature.

Once in a while, even in our Northern cities, at noon, in a very
hot summer's day, one may realize, by a sudden extension in his
sphere of consciousness, how closely he is shut up for the most
part.--Do you not remember something like this?  July, between 1
and 2, P. M., Fahrenheit 96 degrees, or thereabout.  Windows all
gaping, like the mouths of panting dogs.  Long, stinging cry of a
locust comes in from a tree, half a mile off; had forgotten there
was such a tree.  Baby's screams from a house several blocks
distant;--never knew there were any babies in the neighborhood
before.  Tinman pounding something that clatters dreadfully,--very
distinct, but don't remember any tinman's shop near by.  Horses
stamping on pavement to get off flies.  When you hear these four
sounds, you may set it down as a warm day.  Then it is that one
would like to imitate the mode of life of the native at Sierra
Leone, as somebody has described it:  stroll into the market in
natural costume,--buy a water-melon for a halfpenny,--split it, and
scoop out the middle,--sit down in one half of the empty rind, clap
the other on one's head, and feast upon the pulp.

--I see some of the London journals have been attacking some of
their literary people for lecturing, on the ground of its being a
public exhibition of themselves for money.  A popular author can
print his lecture; if he deliver it, it is a case of quaestum
corpore, or making profit of his person.  None but "snobs" do that.
Ergo, etc.  To this I reply,--Negatur minor.  Her Most Gracious
Majesty, the Queen, exhibits herself to the public as a part of the
service for which she is paid.  We do not consider it low-bred in
her to pronounce her own speech, and should prefer it so to hearing
it from any other person, or reading it.  His Grace and his
Lordship exhibit themselves very often for popularity, and their
houses every day for money.--No, if a man shows himself other than
he is, if he belittles himself before an audience for hire, then he
acts unworthily.  But a true word, fresh from the lips of a true
man, is worth paying for, at the rate of eight dollars a day, or
even of fifty dollars a lecture.  The taunt must be an outbreak of
jealousy against the renowned authors who have the audacity to be
also orators.  The sub-lieutenants (of the press) stick a too
popular writer and speaker with an epithet in England, instead of
with a rapier, as in France.--Poh!  All England is one great
menagerie, and, all at once, the jackal, who admires the gilded
cage of the royal beast, must protest against the vulgarity of the
talking-bird's and the nightingale's being willing to become a part
of the exhibition!


THE LONG PATH.
(Last of the Parentheses.)


Yes, that was my last walk with the SCHOOLMISTRESS.  It happened to
be the end of a term; and before the next began, a very nice young
woman, who had been her assistant, was announced as her successor,
and she was provided for elsewhere.  So it was no longer the
schoolmistress that I walked with, but--Let us not be in unseemly
haste.  I shall call her the schoolmistress still; some of you love
her under that name.

When it became known among the boarders that two of their number
had joined hands to walk down the long path of life side by side,
there was, as you may suppose, no small sensation.  I confess I
pitied our landlady.  It took her all of a suddin,--she said.  Had
not known that we was keepin company, and never mistrusted anything
particular.  Ma'am was right to better herself.  Didn't look very
rugged to take care of a femily, but could get hired haalp, she
calc'lated.--The great maternal instinct came crowding up in her
soul just then, and her eyes wandered until they settled on her
daughter.

--No, poor, dear woman,--that could not have been.  But I am
dropping one of my internal tears for you, with this pleasant smile
on my face all the time.

The great mystery of God's providence is the permitted crushing out
of flowering instincts.  Life is maintained by the respiration of
oxygen and of sentiments.  In the long catalogue of scientific
cruelties there is hardly anything quite so painful to think of as
that experiment of putting an animal under the bell of an air-pump
and exhausting the air from it.  [I never saw the accursed trick
performed.  Laus Deo!]  There comes a time when the souls of human
beings, women, perhaps, more even than men, begin to faint for the
atmosphere of the affections they were made to breathe.  Then it is
that Society places its transparent bell-glass over the young woman
who is to be the subject of one of its fatal experiments.  The
element by which only the heart lives is sucked out of her
crystalline prison.  Watch her through its transparent walls;--her
bosom is heaving; but it is in a vacuum.  Death is no riddle,
compared to this.  I remember a poor girl's story in the "Book of
Martyrs."  The "dry-pan and the gradual fire" were the images that
frightened her most.  How many have withered and wasted under as
slow a torment in the walls of that larger Inquisition which we
call Civilization!

Yes, my surface-thought laughs at you, you foolish, plain,
overdressed, mincing, cheaply-organized, self-saturated young
person, whoever you may be, now reading this,--little thinking you
are what I describe, and in blissful unconsciousness that you are
destined to the lingering asphyxia of soul which is the lot of such
multitudes worthier than yourself.  But it is only my surface-
thought which laughs.  For that great procession of the UNLOVED,
who not only wear the crown of thorns, but must hide it under the
locks of brown or gray,--under the snowy cap, under the chilling
turban,--hide it even from themselves,--perhaps never know they
wear it, though it kills them,--there is no depth of tenderness in
my nature that Pity has not sounded.  Somewhere,--somewhere,--love
is in store for them,--the universe must not be allowed to
fool them so cruelly.  What infinite pathos in the small,
half-unconscious artifices by which unattractive young persons seek
to recommend themselves to the favor of those towards whom our dear
sisters, the unloved, like the rest, are impelled by their God-given
instincts!

Read what the singing-women--one to ten thousand of the suffering
women--tell us, and think of the griefs that die unspoken!  Nature
is in earnest when she makes a woman; and there are women enough
lying in the next churchyard with very commonplace blue
slate-stones at their head and feet, for whom it was just as true
that "all sounds of life assumed one tone of love," as for Letitia
Landon, of whom Elizabeth Browning said it; but she could give words
to her grief, and they could not.--Will you hear a few stanzas of
mine?


THE VOICELESS.

We count the broken lyres that rest
Where the sweet wailing singers slumber,--
But o'er their silent sister's breast
The wild flowers who will stoop to number?
A few can touch the magic string,
And noisy Fame is proud to win them;--
Alas for those that never sing,
But die with all their music in them!

Nay, grieve not for the dead alone
Whose song has told their hearts' sad story,--
Weep for the voiceless, who have known
The cross without the crown of glory!
Not where Leucadian breezes sweep
O'er Sappho's memory-haunted billow,
But where the glistening night-dews weep
On nameless sorrow's churchyard pillow.

O hearts that break and give no sign
Save whitening lip and fading tresses,
Till Death pours out his cordial wine
Slow-dropped from Misery's crushing presses,--
If singing breath or echoing chord
To every hidden pang were given,
What endless melodies were poured,
As sad as earth, as sweet as heaven!


I hope that our landlady's daughter is not so badly off, after all.
That young man from another city who made the remark which you
remember about Boston State-house and Boston folks, has appeared at
our table repeatedly of late, and has seemed to me rather attentive
to this young lady.  Only last evening I saw him leaning over her
while she was playing the accordion,--indeed, I undertook to join
them in a song, and got as far as "Come rest in this boo-oo," when,
my voice getting tremulous, I turned off, as one steps out of a
procession, and left the basso and soprano to finish it.  I see no
reason why this young woman should not be a very proper match for a
man that laughs about Boston State-house.  He can't be very
particular.

The young fellow whom I have so often mentioned was a little free
in his remarks, but very good-natured.--Sorry to have you go,--he
said.--School-ma'am made a mistake not to wait for me.  Haven't
taken anything but mournin' fruit at breakfast since I heard of
it.--MOURNING fruit,--said I,--what's that?--Huckleberries and
blackberries,--said he;--couldn't eat in colors, raspberries,
currants, and such, after a solemn thing like this happening.--The
conceit seemed to please the young fellow.  If you will believe it,
when we came down to breakfast the next morning, he had carried it
out as follows.  You know those odious little "saas-plates" that
figure so largely at boarding-houses, and especially at taverns,
into which a strenuous attendant female trowels little dabs, sombre
of tint and heterogeneous of composition, which it makes you feel
homesick to look at, and into which you poke the elastic coppery
tea-spoon with the air of a cat dipping her foot into a wash-tub,
--(not that I mean to say anything against them, for, when they are
of tinted porcelain or starry many-faceted crystal, and hold clean
bright berries, or pale virgin honey, or "lucent syrups tinct
with cinnamon," and the teaspoon is of white silver, with the
Tower-stamp, solid, but not brutally heavy,--as people in the green
stage of millionism will have them,--I can dally with their amber
semi-fluids or glossy spherules without a shiver,)--you know these
small, deep dishes, I say.  When we came down the next morning, each
of these (two only excepted) was covered with a broad leaf. On
lifting this, each boarder found a small heap of solemn black
huckleberries.  But one of those plates held red currants, and was
covered with a red rose; the other held white currants, and was
covered with a white rose.  There was a laugh at this at first, and
then a short silence, and I noticed that her lip trembled, and the
old gentleman opposite was in trouble to get at his bandanna
handkerchief

--"What was the use in waiting?  We should be too late for
Switzerland, that season, if we waited much longer."--The hand I
held trembled in mine, and the eyes fell meekly, as Esther bowed
herself before the feet of Ahasuerus.--She had been reading that
chapter, for she looked up,--if there was a film of moisture over
her eyes there was also the faintest shadow of a distant smile
skirting her lips, but not enough to accent the dimples,--and said,
in her pretty, still way,--"If it please the king, and if I have
found favor in his sight, and the thing seem right before the king,
and I be pleasing in his eyes"--

I don't remember what King Ahasuerus did or said when Esther got
just to that point of her soft, humble words,--but I know what I
did.  That quotation from Scripture was cut short, anyhow.  We came
to a compromise on the great question, and the time was settled for
the last day of summer.

In the mean time, I talked on with our boarders, much as usual, as
you may see by what I have reported.  I must say, I was pleased
with a certain tenderness they all showed toward us, after the
first excitement of the news was over.  It came out in trivial
matters,--but each one, in his or her way, manifested kindness.
Our landlady, for instance, when we had chickens, sent the LIVER
instead of the GIZZARD, with the wing, for the schoolmistress.
This was not an accident; the two are never mistaken, though some
landladies APPEAR as if they did not know the difference.  The
whole of the company were even more respectfully attentive to my
remarks than usual.  There was no idle punning, and very little
winking on the part of that lively young gentleman who, as the
reader may remember, occasionally interposed some playful question
or remark, which could hardly be considered relevant,--except when
the least allusion was made to matrimony, when he would look at the
landlady's daughter, and wink with both sides of his face, until
she would ask what he was pokin' his fun at her for, and if he
wasn't ashamed of himself.  In fact, they all behaved very
handsomely, so that I really felt sorry at the thought of leaving
my boarding-house.

I suppose you think, that, because I lived at a plain widow-woman's
plain table, I was of course more or less infirm in point of
worldly fortune.  You may not be sorry to learn, that, though not
what GREAT MERCHANTS call very rich, I was comfortable,
--comfortable,--so that most of those moderate luxuries I described
in my verses on CONTENTMENT--MOST of them, I say--were within our
reach, if we chose to have them.  But I found out that the
schoolmistress had a vein of charity about her, which had hitherto
been worked on a small silver and copper basis, which made her
think less, perhaps, of luxuries than even I did,--modestly as I
have expressed my wishes.

It is a rather pleasant thing to tell a poor young woman, whom one
has contrived to win without showing his rent-roll, that she has
found what the world values so highly, in following the lead of her
affections.  That was an enjoyment I was now ready for.

I began abruptly:--Do you know that you are a rich young person?

I know that I am very rich,--she said.--Heaven has given me more
than I ever asked; for I had not thought love was ever meant for
me.

It was a woman's confession, and her voice fell to a whisper as it
threaded the last words.

I don't mean that,--I said,--you blessed little saint and seraph!
--if there's an angel missing in the New Jerusalem, inquire for her
at this boarding house!--I don't mean that!  I mean that I--that
is, you--am--are--confound it!--I mean that you'll be what most
people call a lady of fortune.  And I looked full in her eyes for
the effect of the announcement.

There wasn't any.  She said she was thankful that I had what would
save me from drudgery, and that some other time I should tell her
about it.--I never made a greater failure in an attempt to produce
a sensation.

So the last day of summer came.  It was our choice to go to the
church, but we had a kind of reception at the boarding-house.  The
presents were all arranged, and among them none gave more pleasure
than the modest tributes of our fellow-boarders,--for there was not
one, I believe, who did not send something.  The landlady would
insist on making an elegant bride-cake, with her own hands; to
which Master Benjamin Franklin wished to add certain embellishments
out of his private funds,--namely, a Cupid in a mouse-trap, done in
white sugar, and two miniature flags with the stars and stripes,
which had a very pleasing effect, I assure you.  The landlady's
daughter sent a richly bound copy of Tupper's Poems.  On a blank
leaf was the following, written in a very delicate and careful
hand:-


Presented to . . . by . . .
On the eve ere her union in holy matrimony.
May sunshine ever beam o'er her!


Even the poor relative thought she must do something, and sent a
copy of "The Whole Duty of Man," bound in very attractive
variegated sheepskin, the edges nicely marbled.  From the
divinity-student came the loveliest English edition of "Keble's
Christian Year."  I opened it, when it came, to the FOURTH SUNDAY
IN LENT, and read that angelic poem, sweeter than anything I can
remember since Xavier's "My God, I love thee."--I am not a
Churchman,--I don't believe in planting oaks in flower-pots,--but
such a poem as "The Rosebud" makes one's heart a proselyte to the
culture it grows from.  Talk about it as much as you like,--one's
breeding shows itself nowhere more than in his religion.  A man
should be a gentleman in his hymns and prayers; the fondness for
"scenes," among vulgar saints, contrasts so meanly with that--


"God only and good angels look
Behind the blissful scene,"-


and that other,--


"He could not trust his melting soul
But in his Maker's sight,"--


that I hope some of them will see this, and read the poem, and
profit by it.

My laughing and winking young friend undertook to procure and
arrange the flowers for the table, and did it with immense zeal.  I
never saw him look happier than when he came in, his hat saucily on
one side, and a cheroot in his mouth, with a huge bunch of
tea-roses, which he said were for "Madam."

One of the last things that came was an old square box, smelling of
camphor, tied and sealed.  It bore, in faded ink, the marks,
"Calcutta, 1805."  On opening it, we found a white Cashmere shawl
with a very brief note from the dear old gentleman opposite, saying
that he had kept this some years, thinking he might want it, and
many more, not knowing what to do with it,--that he had never seen
it unfolded since he was a young supercargo,--and now, if she would
spread it on her shoulders, it would make him feel young to look at
it.

Poor Bridget, or Biddy, our red-armed maid of all work!  What must
she do but buy a small copper breast-pin and put it under
"Schoolma'am's" plate that morning, at breakfast?  And Schoolma'am
would wear it,--though I made her cover it, as well as I could,
with a tea-rose.

It was my last breakfast as a boarder, and I could not leave them
in utter silence.

Good-by,--I said,--my dear friends, one and all of you!  I have
been long with you, and I find it hard parting.  I have to thank
you for a thousand courtesies, and above all for the patience and
indulgence with which you have listened to me when I have tried to
instruct or amuse you.  My friend the Professor (who, as well as my
friend the Poet, is unavoidably absent on this interesting
occasion) has given me reason to suppose that he would occupy my
empty chair about the first of January next.  If he comes among
you, be kind to him, as you have been to me.  May the Lord bless
you all!--And we shook hands all round the table.

Half an hour afterwards the breakfast things and the cloth were
gone.  I looked up and down the length of the bare boards over
which I had so often uttered my sentiments and experiences--and
--Yes, I am a man, like another.

All sadness vanished, as, in the midst of these old friends of
mine, whom you know, and others a little more up in the world,
perhaps, to whom I have not introduced you, I took the
schoolmistress before the altar from the hands of the old gentleman
who used to sit opposite, and who would insist on giving her away.

And now we two are walking the long path in peace together.  The
"schoolmistress" finds her skill in teaching called for again,
without going abroad to seek little scholars.  Those visions of
mine have all come true.

I hope you all love me none the less for anything I have told you.
Farewell!






THE PROFESSOR AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE

by Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr.


PREFACE TO REVISED EDITION.

The reader of to-day will not forget, I trust, that it is nearly a
quarter of a century since these papers were written.  Statements which
were true then are not necessarily true now.  Thus, the speed of the
trotting horse has been so much developed that the record of the year
when the fastest time to that date was given must be very considerably
altered, as may be seen by referring to a note on page 49 of the
"Autocrat."  No doubt many other statements and opinions might be more or
less modified if I were writing today instead of having written before
the war, when the world and I were both more than a score of years
younger.

These papers followed close upon the track of the "Autocrat."  They had
to endure the trial to which all second comers are subjected, which is a
formidable ordeal for the least as well as the greatest. Paradise
Regained and the Second Part of Faust are examples which are enough to
warn every one who has made a jingle fair hit with his arrow of the
danger of missing when he looses "his fellow of the selfsame flight."

There is good reason why it should be so.  The first juice that runs of
itself from the grapes comes from the heart of the fruit, and tastes of
the pulp only; when the grapes are squeezed in the press the flow betrays
the flavor of the skin.  If there is any freshness in the original idea
of the work, if there is any individuality in the method or style of a
new author, or of an old author on a new track, it will have lost much of
its first effect when repeated. Still, there have not been wanting
readers who have preferred this second series of papers to the first.
The new papers were more aggressive than the earlier ones, and for that
reason found a heartier welcome in some quarters, and met with a sharper
antagonism in others.  It amuses me to look back on some of the attacks
they called forth.  Opinions which do not excite the faintest show of
temper at this time from those who do not accept them were treated as if
they were the utterances of a nihilist incendiary.  It required the
exercise of some forbearance not to recriminate.

How a stray sentence, a popular saying, the maxim of some wise man, a
line accidentally fallen upon and remembered, will sometimes help one
when he is all ready to be vexed or indignant!  One day, in the time when
I was young or youngish, I happened to open a small copy of "Tom Jones,"
and glance at the title-page.  There was one of those little engravings
opposite, which bore the familiar name of "T. Uwins," as I remember it,
and under it the words "Mr. Partridge bore all this patiently."  How many
times, when, after rough usage from ill-mannered critics, my own
vocabulary of vituperation was simmering in such a lively way that it
threatened to boil and lift its lid and so boil over, those words have
calmed the small internal effervescence!  There is very little in them
and very little of them; and so there is not much in a linchpin
considered by itself, but it often keeps a wheel from coming off and
prevents what might be a catastrophe.  The chief trouble in offering such
papers as these to the readers of to-day is that their heresies have
become so familiar among intelligent people that they have too
commonplace an aspect. All the lighthouses and land-marks of belief bear
so differently from the way in which they presented themselves when these
papers were written that it is hard to recognize that we and our
fellow-passengers are still in the same old vessel sailing the same
unfathomable sea and bound to the same as yet unseen harbor.

But after all, there is not enough theology, good or bad, in these papers
to cause them to be inscribed on the Protestant Index Expurgatorius; and
if they are medicated with a few questionable dogmas or antidogmas, the
public has become used to so much rougher treatments, that what was once
an irritant may now act as an anodyne, and the reader may nod over pages
which, when they were first written, would have waked him into a paroxysm
of protest and denunciation.

November, 1882.




PREFACE TO THE NEW EDITION

This book is one of those which, if it lives for a number of decades, and
if it requires any Preface at all, wants a new one every ten years.  The
first Preface to a book is apt to be explanatory, perhaps apologetic, in
the expectation of attacks from various quarters.  If the book is in some
points in advance of public opinion, it is natural that the writer should
try to smooth the way to the reception of his more or less aggressive
ideas.  He wishes to convince, not to offend,--to obtain a hearing for
his thought, not to stir up angry opposition in those who do not accept
it.  There is commonly an anxious look about a first Preface.  The author
thinks he shall be misapprehended about this or that matter, that his
well-meant expressions will probably be invidiously interpreted by those
whom he looks upon as prejudiced critics, and if he deals with living
questions that he will be attacked as a destructive by the conservatives
and reproached for his timidity by the noisier radicals.  The first
Preface, therefore, is likely to be the weakest part of a work containing
the thoughts of an honest writer.

After a time the writer has cooled down from his excitement,--has got
over his apprehensions, is pleased to find that his book is still read,
and that he must write a new Preface.  He comes smiling to his task.  How
many things have explained themselves in the ten or twenty or thirty
years since he came before his untried public in those almost plaintive
paragraphs in which he introduced himself to his readers,--for the
Preface writer, no matter how fierce a combatant he may prove, comes on
to the stage with his shield on his right arm and his sword in his left
hand.

The Professor at the Breakfast-Table came out in the "Atlantic Monthly"
and introduced itself without any formal Preface.  A quarter of a century
later the Preface of 1882, which the reader has just had laid before him,
was written.  There is no mark of worry, I think, in that.  Old opponents
had come up and shaken hands with the author they had attacked or
denounced.  Newspapers which had warned their subscribers against him
were glad to get him as a contributor to their columns.  A great change
had come over the community with reference to their beliefs.  Christian
believers were united as never before in the feeling that, after all,
their common object was to elevate the moral and religious standard of
humanity.  But within the special compartments of the great Christian
fold the marks of division have pronounced themselves in the most
unmistakable manner. As an example we may take the lines of cleavage
which have shown themselves in the two great churches, the Congregational
and the Presbyterian, and the very distinct fissure which is manifest in
the transplanted Anglican church of this country.  Recent circumstances
have brought out the fact of the great change in the dogmatic communities
which has been going on silently but surely.  The licensing of a
missionary, the transfer of a Professor from one department to another,
the election of a Bishop,--each of these movements furnishes evidence
that there is no such thing as an air-tight reservoir of doctrinal
finalities.

The folding-doors are wide open to every Protestant to enter all the
privileged precincts and private apartments of the various exclusive
religious organizations.  We may demand the credentials of every creed
and catechise all the catechisms.  So we may discuss the gravest
questions unblamed over our morning coffee-cups or our evening tea-cups.
There is no rest for the Protestant until he gives up his legendary
anthropology and all its dogmatic dependencies.

It is only incidentally, however, that the Professor at the
Breakfast-Table handles matters which are the subjects of religious
controversy.  The reader who is sensitive about having his fixed beliefs
dealt with as if they were open to question had better skip the pages
which look as if they would disturb his complacency. "Faith" is the most
precious of possessions, and it dislikes being meddled with.  It means,
of course, self-trust,--that is, a belief in the value of our, own
opinion of a doctrine, of a church, of a religion, of a Being, a belief
quite independent of any evidence that we can bring to convince a jury of
our fellow beings.  Its roots are thus inextricably entangled with those
of self-love and bleed as mandrakes were said to, when pulled up as
weeds.  Some persons may even at this late day take offence at a few
opinions expressed in the following pages, but most of these passages
will be read without loss of temper by those who disagree with them, and
by-and-by they may be found too timid and conservative for intelligent
readers, if they are still read by any.

BEVERLY FARM, MASS., June 18, 1891.
O.  W.  H.

                        THE PROFESSOR

                           AT THE
                       BREAKFAST-TABLE.

          What he said, what he heard, and what he saw.




I

I intended to have signalized my first appearance by a certain large
statement, which I flatter myself is the nearest approach to a universal
formula, of life yet promulgated at this breakfast-table. It would have
had a grand effect.  For this purpose I fixed my eyes on a certain
divinity-student, with the intention of exchanging a few phrases, and
then forcing my court-card, namely, The great end of being.--I will thank
you for the sugar,--I said.--Man is a dependent creature.

It is a small favor to ask,--said the divinity-student,--and passed the
sugar to me.

--Life is a great bundle of little things,--I said.

The divinity-student smiled, as if that were the concluding epigram of
the sugar question.

You smile,--I said.--Perhaps life seems to you a little bundle of great
things?

The divinity-student started a laugh, but suddenly reined it back with a
pull, as one throws a horse on his haunches.--Life is a great bundle of
great things,--he said.

(NOW, THEN!)  The great end of being, after all, is....

Hold on!--said my neighbor, a young fellow whose name seems to be John,
and nothing else,--for that is what they all call him,--hold on! the
Sculpin is go'n' to say somethin'.

Now the Sculpin (Cottus Virginianus) is a little water-beast which
pretends to consider itself a fish, and, under that pretext, hangs about
the piles upon which West-Boston Bridge is built, swallowing the bait and
hook intended for flounders.  On being drawn from the water, it exposes
an immense head, a diminutive bony carcass, and a surface so full of
spines, ridges, ruffles, and frills, that the naturalists have not been
able to count them without quarrelling about the number, and that the
colored youth, whose sport they spoil, do not like to touch them, and
especially to tread on them, unless they happen to have shoes on, to
cover the thick white soles of their broad black feet.

When, therefore, I heard the young fellow's exclamation, I looked round
the table with curiosity to see what it meant.  At the further end of it
I saw a head, and a--a small portion of a little deformed body, mounted
on a high chair, which brought the occupant up to a fair level enough for
him to get at his food.  His whole appearance was so grotesque, I felt
for a minute as if there was a showman behind him who would pull him down
presently and put up Judy, or the hangman, or the Devil, or some other
wooden personage of the famous spectacle.  I contrived to lose the first
of his sentence, but what I heard began so:

--by the Frog-Pond, when there were frogs in and the folks used to come
down from the tents on section and Independence days with their pails to
get water to make egg-pop with.  Born in Boston; went to school in Boston
as long as the boys would let me.--The little man groaned, turned, as if
to look around, and went on.--Ran away from school one day to see
Phillips hung for killing Denegri with a logger-head.  That was in flip
days, when there were always two three loggerheads in the fire.  I'm a
Boston boy, I tell you,--born at North End, and mean to be buried on
Copp's Hill, with the good old underground people,--the Worthylakes, and
the rest of 'em.  Yes,--up on the old hill, where they buried Captain
Daniel Malcolm in a stone grave, ten feet deep, to keep him safe from the
red-coats, in those old times when the world was frozen up tight and
there was n't but one spot open, and that was right over Faneuil
all,--and black enough it looked, I tell you!  There 's where my bones
shall lie, Sir, and rattle away when the big guns go off at the Navy Yard
opposite!  You can't make me ashamed of the old place!  Full crooked
little streets;--I was born and used to run round in one of 'em--

--I should think so,--said that young man whom I hear them call
"John,"--softly, not meaning to be heard, nor to be cruel, but thinking
in a half-whisper, evidently.--I should think so; and got kinked up,
turnin' so many corners.--The little man did not hear what was said, but
went on,--

--full of crooked little streets; but I tell you Boston has opened, and
kept open, more turnpikes that lead straight to free thought and free
speech and free deeds than any other city of live men or dead men,--I
don't care how broad their streets are, nor how high their steeples!

--How high is Bosting meet'n'-house?--said a person with black whiskers
and imperial, a velvet waistcoat, a guard-chain rather too massive, and a
diamond pin so very large that the most trusting nature might confess an
inward suggestion,--of course, nothing amounting to a suspicion.  For
this is a gentleman from a great city, and sits next to the landlady's
daughter, who evidently believes in him, and is the object of his
especial attention.

How high?--said the little man.--As high as the first step of the stairs
that lead to the New Jerusalem.  Is n't that high enough?

It is,--I said.--The great end of being is to harmonize man with the
order of things, and the church has been a good pitch-pipe, and may be so
still.  But who shall tune the pitch-pipe?  Quis cus-(On the whole, as
this quotation was not entirely new, and, being in a foreign language,
might not be familiar to all the boarders, I thought I would not finish
it.)

--Go to the Bible!--said a sharp voice from a sharp-faced, sharp-eyed,
sharp-elbowed, strenuous-looking woman in a black dress, appearing as if
it began as a piece of mourning and perpetuated itself as a bit of
economy.

You speak well, Madam,--I said;--yet there is room for a gloss or
commentary on what you say.  "He who would bring back the wealth of the
Indies must carry out the wealth of the Indies."  What you bring away
from the Bible depends to some extent on what you carry to it.--Benjamin
Franklin!  Be so good as to step up to my chamber and bring me down the
small uncovered pamphlet of twenty pages which you will find lying under
the "Cruden's Concordance." [The boy took a large bite, which left a very
perfect crescent in the slice of bread-and-butter he held, and departed
on his errand, with the portable fraction of his breakfast to sustain him
on the way.]

--Here it is.  "Go to the Bible.  A Dissertation, etc., etc.  By J. J.
Flournoy.  Athens, Georgia, 1858."

Mr. Flournoy, Madam, has obeyed the precept which you have judiciously
delivered.  You may be interested, Madam, to know what are the
conclusions at which Mr. J. J. Flournoy of Athens, Georgia, has arrived.
You shall hear, Madam.  He has gone to the Bible, and he has come back
from the Bible, bringing a remedy for existing social evils, which, if it
is the real specific, as it professes to be, is of great interest to
humanity, and to the female part of humanity in particular.  It is what
he calls TRIGAMY, Madam, or the marrying of three wives, so that "good
old men" may be solaced at once by the companionship of the wisdom of
maturity, and of those less perfected but hardly less engaging qualities
which are found at an earlier period of life.  He has followed your
precept, Madam; I hope you accept his conclusions.

The female boarder in black attire looked so puzzled, and, in fact, "all
abroad," after the delivery of this "counter" of mine, that I left her to
recover her wits, and went on with the conversation, which I was
beginning to get pretty well in hand.

But in the mean time I kept my eye on the female boarder to see what
effect I had produced.  First, she was a little stunned at having her
argument knocked over.  Secondly, she was a little shocked at the
tremendous character of the triple matrimonial suggestion.  Thirdly.--I
don't like to say what I thought.  Something seemed to have pleased her
fancy.  Whether it was, that, if trigamy should come into fashion, there
would be three times as many chances to enjoy the luxury of saying, "No!"
is more than I, can tell you.  I may as well mention that B. F. came to
me after breakfast to borrow the pamphlet for "a lady,"--one of the
boarders, he said,--looking as if he had a secret he wished to be
relieved of.

--I continued.--If a human soul is necessarily to be trained up in the
faith of those from whom it inherits its body, why, there is the end of
all reason.  If, sooner or later, every soul is to look for truth with
its own eyes, the first thing is to recognize that no presumption in
favor of any particular belief arises from the fact of our inheriting it.
Otherwise you would not give the Mahometan a fair chance to become a
convert to a better religion.

The second thing would be to depolarize every fixed religious idea in the
mind by changing the word which stands for it.

--I don't know what you mean by "depolarizing" an idea,--said the
divinity-student.

I will tell you,--I said.---When a given symbol which represents a
thought has lain for a certain length of time in the mind, it undergoes a
change like that which rest in a certain position gives to iron.  It
becomes magnetic in its relations,--it is traversed by strange forces
which did not belong to it.  The word, and consequently the idea it
represents, is polarized.

The religious currency of mankind, in thought, in speech, and in print,
consists entirely of polarized words.  Borrow one of these from another
language and religion, and you will find it leaves all its magnetism
behind it.  Take that famous word, O'm, of the Hindoo mythology.  Even a
priest cannot pronounce it without sin; and a holy Pundit would shut his
ears and run away from you in horror, if you should say it aloud.  What
do you care for O'm?  If you wanted to get the Pundit to look at his
religion fairly, you must first depolarize this and all similar words for
him.  The argument for and against new translations of the Bible really
turns on this.  Skepticism is afraid to trust its truths in depolarized
words, and so cries out against a new translation.  I think, myself, if
every idea our Book contains could be shelled out of its old symbol and
put into a new, clean, unmagnetic word, we should have some chance of
reading it as philosophers, or wisdom-lovers, ought to read it,--which we
do not and cannot now any more than a Hindoo can read the "Gayatri" as a
fair man and lover of truth should do.  When society has once fairly
dissolved the New Testament, which it never has done yet, it will perhaps
crystallize it over again in new forms of language.

I did n't know you was a settled minister over this parish,--said the
young fellow near me.

A sermon by a lay-preacher may be worth listening--I replied, calmly.
--It gives the parallax of thought and feeling as they appear to the
observers from two very different points of view.  If you wish to get the
distance of a heavenly body, you know that you must take two observations
from remote points of the earth's orbit,--in midsummer and midwinter, for
instance.  To get the parallax of heavenly truths, you must take an
observation from the position of the laity as well as of the clergy.
Teachers and students of theology get a certain look, certain
conventional tones of voice, a clerical gait, a professional neckcloth,
and habits of mind as professional as their externals.  They are
scholarly men and read Bacon, and know well enough what the "idols of the
tribe" are.  Of course they have their false gods, as all men that follow
one exclusive calling are prone to do.--The clergy have played the part
of the flywheel in our modern civilization.  They have never suffered it
to stop.  They have often carried on its movement, when other moving
powers failed, by the momentum stored in their vast body.  Sometimes,
too, they have kept it back by their vis inertia, when its wheels were
like to grind the bones of some old canonized error into fertilizers for
the soil that yields the bread of life.  But the mainspring of the
world's onward religious movement is not in them, nor in any one body of
men, let me tell you.  It is the people that makes the clergy, and not
the clergy that makes the people.  Of course, the profession reacts on
its source with variable energy.--But there never was a guild of dealers
or a company of craftsmen that did not need sharp looking after.

Our old friend, Dr. Holyoke, whom we gave the dinner to some time since,
must have known many people that saw the great bonfire in Harvard College
yard.

--Bonfire?--shrieked the little man.--The bonfire when Robert Calef's
book was burned?

The same,--I said,--when Robert Calef the Boston merchant's book was
burned in the yard of Harvard College, by order of Increase Mather,
President of the College and Minister of the Gospel.  You remember the
old witchcraft revival of '92, and how stout Master Robert Calef, trader
of Boston, had the pluck to tell the ministers and judges what a set of
fools and worse than fools they were--

Remember it?--said the little man.--I don't think I shall forget it, as
long as I can stretch this forefinger to point with, and see what it
wears.  There was a ring on it.

May I look at it?--I said.

Where it is,--said the little man;--it will never come off, till it falls
off from the bone in the darkness and in the dust.

He pushed the high chair on which he sat slightly back from the table,
and dropped himself, standing, to the floor,--his head being only a
little above the level of the table, as he stood.  With pain and labor,
lifting one foot over the other, as a drummer handles his sticks, he took
a few steps from his place,--his motions and the deadbeat of the
misshapen boots announcing to my practised eye and ear the malformation
which is called in learned language talipes varus, or inverted club-foot.

Stop! stop!--I said,--let me come to you.

The little man hobbled back, and lifted himself by the left arm, with an
ease approaching to grace which surprised me, into his high chair. I
walked to his side, and he stretched out the forefinger of his right
hand, with the ring upon it.  The ring had been put on long ago, and
could not pass the misshapen joint.  It was one of those funeral rings
which used to be given to relatives and friends after the decease of
persons of any note or importance.  Beneath a round fit of glass was a
death's head.  Engraved on one side of this, "L. B.  AEt.  22,"--on the
other, "Ob. 1692"

My grandmother's grandmother,--said the little man.--Hanged for a witch.
It does n't seem a great while ago.  I knew my grandmother, and loved
her.  Her mother was daughter to the witch that Chief Justice Sewall
hanged and Cotton Mather delivered over to the Devil.--That was Salem,
though, and not Boston.  No, not Boston.  Robert Calef, the Boston
merchant, it was that blew them all to--

Never mind where he blew them to,--I said; for the little man was getting
red in the face, and I did n't know what might come next.

This episode broke me up, as the jockeys say, out of my square
conversational trot; but I settled down to it again.

--A man that knows men, in the street, at their work, human nature in its
shirt-sleeves, who makes bargains with deacons, instead of talking over
texts with them, a man who has found out that there are plenty of praying
rogues and swearing saints in the world,--above all, who has found out,
by living into the pith and core of life, that all of the Deity which can
be folded up between the sheets of any human book is to the Deity of the
firmament, of the strata, of the hot aortic flood of throbbing human
life, of this infinite, instantaneous consciousness in which the soul's
being consists,--an incandescent point in the filament connecting the
negative pole of a past eternity with the positive pole of an eternity
that is to come,--that all of the Deity which any human book can hold is
to this larger Deity of the working battery of the universe only as the
films in a book of gold-leaf are to the broad seams and curdled lumps of
ore that lie in unsunned mines and virgin placers,--Oh!--I was saying
that a man who lives out-of-doors, among live people, gets some things
into his head he might not find in the index of his "Body of Divinity."

I tell you what,--the idea of the professions' digging a moat round their
close corporations, like that Japanese one at Jeddo, on the bottom of
which, if travellers do not lie, you could put Park Street Church and
look over the vane from its side, and try to stretch another such spire
across it without spanning the chasm,--that idea, I say, is pretty nearly
worn out.  Now when a civilization or a civilized custom falls into
senile dementia, there is commonly a judgment ripe for it, and it comes
as plagues come, from a breath,--as fires come, from a spark.

Here, look at medicine.  Big wigs, gold-headed canes, Latin
prescriptions, shops full of abominations, recipes a yard long, "curing"
patients by drugging as sailors bring a wind by whistling, selling lies
at a guinea apiece,--a routine, in short, of giving unfortunate sick
people a mess of things either too odious to swallow or too acrid to
hold, or, if that were possible, both at once.

--You don't know what I mean, indignant and not unintelligent
country-practitioner?  Then you don't know the history of medicine,--and
that is not my fault.  But don't expose yourself in any outbreak of
eloquence; for, by the mortar in which Anaxarchus was pounded!  I did not
bring home Schenckius and Forestus and Hildanus, and all the old folios
in calf and vellum I will show you, to be bullied by the proprietor, of a
"Wood and Bache," and a shelf of peppered sheepskin reprints by
Philadelphia Editors.  Besides, many of the profession and I know a
little something of each other, and you don't think I am such a simpleton
as to lose their good opinion by saying what the better heads among them
would condemn as unfair and untrue?  Now mark how the great plague came
on the generation of drugging doctors, and in what form it fell.

A scheming drug-vender, (inventive genius,) an utterly untrustworthy and
incompetent observer, (profound searcher of Nature,) a shallow dabbler in
erudition, (sagacious scholar,) started the monstrous fiction (founded
the immortal system) of Homoeopathy.  I am very fair, you see,---you can
help yourself to either of these sets of phrases.

All the reason in the world would not have had so rapid and general an
effect on the public mind to disabuse it of the idea that a drug is a
good thing in itself, instead of being, as it is, a bad thing, as was
produced by the trick (system) of this German charlatan (theorist).  Not
that the wiser part of the profession needed him to teach them; but the
routinists and their employers, the "general practitioners," who lived by
selling pills and mixtures, and their drug-consuming customers, had to
recognize that people could get well, unpoisoned.  These dumb cattle
would not learn it of themselves, and so the murrain of Homoeopathy fell
on them.

--You don't know what plague has fallen on the practitioners of theology?
I will tell you, then.  It is Spiritualism.  While some are crying out
against it as a delusion of the Devil, and some are laughing at it as an
hysteric folly, and some are getting angry with it as a mere trick of
interested or mischievous persons, Spiritualism is quietly undermining
the traditional ideas of the future state which have been and are still
accepted,--not merely in those who believe in it, but in the general
sentiment of the community, to a larger extent than most good people seem
to be aware of.  It need n't be true, to do this, any more than
Homoeopathy need, to do its work. The Spiritualists have some pretty
strong instincts to pry over, which no doubt have been roughly handled by
theologians at different times.  And the Nemesis of the pulpit comes, in
a shape it little thought of, beginning with the snap of a toe-joint, and
ending with such a crack of old beliefs that the roar of it is heard in
all the ministers' studies of Christendom?  Sir, you cannot have people
of cultivation, of pure character, sensible enough in common things,
large-hearted women, grave judges, shrewd business-men, men of science,
professing to be in communication with the spiritual world and keeping up
constant intercourse with it, without its gradually reacting on the whole
conception of that other life.  It is the folly of the world, constantly,
which confounds its wisdom.  Not only out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings, but out of the mouths of fools and cheats, we may often get
our truest lessons.  For the fool's judgment is a dog-vane that turns
with a breath, and the cheat watches the clouds and sets his weathercock
by them,--so that one shall often see by their pointing which way the
winds of heaven are blowing, when the slow-wheeling arrows and feathers
of what we call the Temples of Wisdom are turning to all points of the
compass.

--Amen!--said the young fellow called John--Ten minutes by the watch.
Those that are unanimous will please to signify by holding up their left
foot!

I looked this young man steadily in the face for about thirty seconds.
His countenance was as calm as that of a reposing infant. I think it was
simplicity, rather than mischief, with perhaps a youthful playfulness,
that led him to this outbreak.  I have often noticed that even quiet
horses, on a sharp November morning, when their coats are beginning to
get the winter roughness, will give little sportive demi-kicks, with
slight sudden elevation of the subsequent region of the body, and a sharp
short whinny,--by no means intending to put their heels through the
dasher, or to address the driver rudely, but feeling, to use a familiar
word, frisky.  This, I think, is the physiological condition of the young
person, John.  I noticed, however, what I should call a palpebral spasm,
affecting the eyelid and muscles of one side, which, if it were intended
for the facial gesture called a wink, might lead me to suspect a
disposition to be satirical on his part.

--Resuming the conversation, I remarked,--I am, ex officio, as a
Professor, a conservative.  For I don't know any fruit that clings to its
tree so faithfully, not even a "froze-'n'-thaw" winter-apple, as a
Professor to the bough of which his chair is made.  You can't shake him
off, and it is as much as you can do to pull him off.  Hence, by a chain
of induction I need not unwind, he tends to conservatism generally.

But then, you know, if you are sailing the Atlantic, and all at once find
yourself in a current, and the sea covered with weeds, and drop your
Fahrenheit over the side and find it eight or ten degrees higher than in
the ocean generally, there is no use in flying in the face of facts and
swearing there is no such thing as a Gulf-Stream, when you are in it.

You can't keep gas in a bladder, and you can't keep knowledge tight in a
profession.  Hydrogen will leak out, and air will leak in, through
India-rubber; and special knowledge will leak out, and general knowledge
will leak in, though a profession were covered with twenty thicknesses of
sheepskin diplomas.

By Jove, Sir, till common sense is well mixed up with medicine, and
common manhood with theology, and common honesty with law, We the people,
Sir, some of us with nut-crackers, and some of us with trip-hammers, and
some of us with pile-drivers, and some of us coming with a whish! like
air-stones out of a lunar volcano, will crash down on the lumps of
nonsense in all of them till we have made powder of them--like Aaron's
calf.

If to be a conservative is to let all the drains of thought choke up and
keep all the soul's windows down,--to shut out the sun from the east and
the wind from the west,--to let the rats run free in the cellar, and the
moths feed their fill in the chambers, and the spiders weave their lace
before the mirrors, till the soul's typhus is bred out of our neglect,
and we begin to snore in its coma or rave in its delirium,--I, Sir, am a
bonnet-rouge, a red cap of the barricades, my friends, rather than a
conservative.

--Were you born in Boston, Sir?--said the little man,--looking eager and
excited.

I was not,--I replied.

It's a pity,--it's a pity,--said the little man;--it 's the place to be
born in.  But if you can't fix it so as to be born here, you can come and
live here.  Old Ben Franklin, the father of American science and the
American Union, was n't ashamed to be born here.  Jim Otis, the father of
American Independence, bothered about in the Cape Cod marshes awhile, but
he came to Boston as soon as he got big enough. Joe Warren, the first
bloody ruffed-shirt of the Revolution, was as good as born here.  Parson
Charming strolled along this way from Newport, and stayed here.  Pity old
Sam Hopkins hadn't come, too;--we'd have made a man of him,--poor, dear,
good old Christian heathen! There he lies, as peaceful as a young baby,
in the old burying-ground!  I've stood on the slab many a time.  Meant
well,--meant well.  Juggernaut.  Parson Charming put a little oil on one
linchpin, and slipped it out so softly, the first thing they knew about
it was the wheel of that side was down.  T' other fellow's at work now,
but he makes more noise about it.  When the linchpin comes out on his
side, there'll be a jerk, I tell you!  Some think it will spoil the old
cart, and they pretend to say that there are valuable things in it which
may get hurt.  Hope not,--hope not.  But this is the great Macadamizing
place,--always cracking up something.

Cracking up Boston folks,--said the gentleman with the diamond-pin, whom,
for convenience' sake, I shall hereafter call the Koh-i-noor.

The little man turned round mechanically towards him, as Maelzel's Turk
used to turn, carrying his head slowly and horizontally, as if it went by
cogwheels.--Cracking up all sorts of things,--native and foreign vermin
included,--said the little man.

This remark was thought by some of us to have a hidden personal
application, and to afford a fair opening for a lively rejoinder, if the
Koh-i-noor had been so disposed.  The little man uttered it with the
distinct wooden calmness with which the ingenious Turk used to exclaim,
E-chec! so that it must have been heard.  The party supposed to be
interested in the remark was, however, carrying a large knife-bladeful of
something to his mouth just then, which, no doubt, interfered with the
reply he would have made.

--My friend who used to board here was accustomed sometimes, in a
pleasant way, to call himself the Autocrat of the table,--meaning, I
suppose, that he had it all his own way among the boarders.  I think our
small boarder here is like to prove a refractory subject, if I undertake
to use the sceptre my friend meant to bequeath me, too magisterially.  I
won't deny that sometimes, on rare occasions, when I have been in company
with gentlemen who preferred listening, I have been guilty of the same
kind of usurpation which my friend openly justified.  But I maintain,
that I, the Professor, am a good listener.  If a man can tell me a fact
which subtends an appreciable angle in the horizon of thought, I am as
receptive as the contribution-box in a congregation of colored brethren.
If, when I am exposing my intellectual dry-goods, a man will begin a good
story, I will have them all in, and my shutters up, before he has got to
the fifth "says he," and listen like a three-years' child, as the author
of the "Old Sailor" says.  I had rather hear one of those grand elemental
laughs from either of our two Georges, (fictitious names, Sir or Madam,)
glisten to one of those old playbills of our College days, in which "Tom
and Jerry" ("Thomas and Jeremiah," as the old Greek Professor was said to
call it) was announced to be brought on the stage with whole force of the
Faculty, read by our Frederick, (no such person, of course,) than say the
best things I might by any chance find myself capable of saying.  Of
course, if I come across a real thinker, a suggestive, acute,
illuminating, informing talker, I enjoy the luxury of sitting still for a
while as much as another.

Nobody talks much that does n't say unwise things,--things he did not
mean to say; as no person plays much without striking a false note
sometimes.  Talk, to me, is only spading up the ground for crops of
thought.  I can't answer for what will turn up.  If I could, it would n't
be talking, but "speaking my piece."  Better, I think, the hearty
abandonment of one's self to the suggestions of the moment at the risk of
an occasional slip of the tongue, perceived the instant it escapes, but
just one syllable too late, than the royal reputation of never saying a
foolish thing.

--What shall I do with this little man?--There is only one thing to
do,--and that is to let him talk when he will.  The day of the
"Autocrat's" monologues is over.

--My friend,--said I to the young fellow whom, as I have said, the
boarders call "John,"--My friend,--I said, one morning, after
breakfast,--can you give me any information respecting the deformed
person who sits at the other end of the table?

What! the Sculpin?--said the young fellow.

The diminutive person, with angular curvature of the spine,--I said,
--and double talipes varus,--I beg your pardon,--with two club-feet.

Is that long word what you call it when a fellah walks so?--said the
young man, making his fists revolve round an imaginary axis, as you may
have seen youth of tender age and limited pugilistic knowledge, when they
show how they would punish an adversary, themselves protected by this
rotating guard,--the middle knuckle, meantime, thumb-supported, fiercely
prominent, death-threatening.

It is,--said I.--But would you have the kindness to tell me if you know
anything about this deformed person?

About the Sculpin?--said the young fellow.

My good friend,--said I,--I am sure, by your countenance, you would not
hurt the feelings of one who has been hardly enough treated by Nature to
be spared by his fellows.  Even in speaking of him to others, I could
wish that you might not employ a term which implies contempt for what
should inspire only pity.

A fellah 's no business to be so crooked,--said the young man called
John.

Yes, yes,--I said, thoughtfully,--the strong hate the weak.  It's all
right.  The arrangement has reference to the race, and not to the
individual.  Infirmity must be kicked out, or the stock run down.
Wholesale moral arrangements are so different from retail!--I understand
the instinct, my friend,--it is cosmic,--it is planetary,--it is a
conservative principle in creation.

The young fellow's face gradually lost its expression as I was speaking,
until it became as blank of vivid significance as the countenance of a
gingerbread rabbit with two currants in the place of eyes.  He had not
taken my meaning.

Presently the intelligence came back with a snap that made him wink, as
he answered,--Jest so.  All right.  A 1.  Put her through.  That's the
way to talk.  Did you speak to me, Sir?--Here the young man struck up
that well-known song which I think they used to sing at Masonic
festivals, beginning, "Aldiborontiphoscophornio, Where left you
Chrononhotonthologos?"

I beg your pardon,--I said;--all I meant was, that men, as temporary
occupants of a permanent abode called human life, which is improved or
injured by occupancy, according to the style of tenant, have a natural
dislike to those who, if they live the life of the race as well as of the
individual, will leave lasting injurious effects upon the abode spoken
of, which is to be occupied by countless future generations.  This is the
final cause of the underlying brute instinct which we have in common with
the herds.

--The gingerbread-rabbit expression was coming on so fast, that I thought
I must try again.--It's a pity that families are kept up, where there are
such hereditary infirmities.  Still, let us treat this poor man fairly,
and not call him names.  Do you know what his name is?

I know what the rest of 'em call him,--said the young fellow.--They call
him Little Boston.  There's no harm in that, is there?

It is an honorable term,--I replied.--But why Little Boston, in a place
where most are Bostonians?

Because nobody else is quite so Boston all over as he is,--said the young
fellow.

"L. B.  Ob. 1692."--Little Boston let him be, when we talk about him. The
ring he wears labels him well enough.  There is stuff in the little man,
or he would n't stick so manfully by this crooked, crotchety old town.
Give him a chance.--You will drop the Sculpin, won't you?--I said to the
young fellow.

Drop him?--he answered,--I ha'n't took him up yet.

No, no,--the term,--I said,--the term.  Don't call him so any more, if
you please.  Call him Little Boston, if you like.

All right,--said the young fellow.--I would n't be hard on the poor
little--

The word he used was objectionable in point of significance and of
grammar.  It was a frequent termination of certain adjectives among the
Romans,--as of those designating a person following the sea, or given to
rural pursuits.  It is classed by custom among the profane words; why, it
is hard to say,--but it is largely used in the street by those who speak
of their fellows in pity or in wrath.

I never heard the young fellow apply the name of the odious pretended
fish to the little man from that day forward.

--Here we are, then, at our boarding--house.  First, myself, the
Professor, a little way from the head of the table, on the right, looking
down, where the "Autocrat" used to sit.  At the further end sits the
Landlady.  At the head of the table, just now, the Koh-i-noor, or the
gentleman with the diamond.  Opposite me is a Venerable Gentleman with a
bland countenance, who as yet has spoken little. The Divinity Student is
my neighbor on the right,--and further down, that Young Fellow of whom I
have repeatedly spoken.  The Landlady's Daughter sits near the
Koh-i-noor, as I said.  The Poor Relation near the Landlady.  At the
right upper corner is a fresh-looking youth of whose name and history I
have as yet learned nothing.  Next the further left-hand corner, near the
lower end of the table, sits the deformed person.  The chair at his side,
occupying that corner, is empty.  I need not specially mention the other
boarders, with the exception of Benjamin Franklin, the landlady's son,
who sits near his mother.  We are a tolerably assorted set,--difference
enough and likeness enough; but still it seems to me there is something
wanting. The Landlady's Daughter is the prima donna in the way of
feminine attractions.  I am not quite satisfied with this young lady.
She wears more "jewelry," as certain young ladies call their trinkets,
than I care to see on a person in her position.  Her voice is strident,
her laugh too much like a giggle, and she has that foolish way of dancing
and bobbing like a quill-float with a "minnum" biting the hook below it,
which one sees and weeps over sometimes in persons of more pretensions.
I can't help hoping we shall put something into that empty chair yet
which will add the missing string to our social harp.  I hear talk of a
rare Miss who is expected.  Something in the schoolgirl way, I believe.
We shall see.

--My friend who calls himself The Autocrat has given me a caution which I
am going to repeat, with my comment upon it, for the benefit of all
concerned.

Professor,--said he, one day,--don't you think your brain will run dry
before a year's out, if you don't get the pump to help the cow? Let me
tell you what happened to me once.  I put a little money into a bank, and
bought a check-book, so that I might draw it as I wanted, in sums to
suit.  Things went on nicely for a time; scratching with a pen was as
easy as rubbing Aladdin's Lamp; and my blank check-book seemed to be a
dictionary of possibilities, in which I could find all the synonymes of
happiness, and realize any one of them on the spot. A check came back to
me at last with these two words on it,--NO FUNDS.  My check-book was a
volume of waste-paper.

Now, Professor,--said he,--I have drawn something out of your bank, you
know; and just so sure as you keep drawing out your soul's currency
without making new deposits, the next thing will be, NO FUNDS,--and then
where will you be, my boy?  These little bits of paper mean your gold and
your silver and your copper, Professor; and you will certainly break up
and go to pieces, if you don't hold on to your metallic basis.

There is something in that,--said I.--Only I rather think life can coin
thought somewhat faster than I can count it off in words.  What if one
shall go round and dry up with soft napkins all the dew that falls of a
June evening on the leaves of his garden?  Shall there be no more dew on
those leaves thereafter?  Marry, yea,--many drops, large and round and
full of moonlight as those thou shalt have absterged!

Here am I, the Professor,--a man who has lived long enough to have
plucked the flowers of life and come to the berries,--which are not
always sad-colored, but sometimes golden-hued as the crocus of April, or
rosy-cheeked as the damask of June; a man who staggered against books as
a baby, and will totter against them, if he lives to decrepitude; with a
brain full of tingling thoughts, such as they are, as a limb which we
call "asleep," because it is so particularly awake, is of pricking points;
presenting a key-board of nerve-pulps, not as yet tanned or ossified, to
finger-touch of all outward agencies; knowing nothing of the filmy
threads of this web of life in which we insects buzz awhile, waiting for
the gray old spider to come along; contented enough with daily realities,
but twirling on his finger the key of a private Bedlam of ideals; in
knowledge feeding with the fox oftener than with the stork,--loving
better the breadth of a fertilizing inundation than the depth of narrow
artesian well; finding nothing too small for his contemplation in the
markings of the grammatophora subtilissima, and nothing too large in the
movement of the solar system towards the star Lambda of the constellation
Hercules;--and the question is, whether there is anything left for me,
the Professor, to suck out of creation, after my lively friend has had
his straw in the bung-hole of the Universe!

A man's mental reactions with the atmosphere of life must go on, whether
he will or no, as between his blood and the air he breathes. As to
catching the residuum of the process, or what we call thought,--the
gaseous ashes of burned-out thinking,--the excretion of mental
respiration,--that will depend on many things, as, on having a favorable
intellectual temperature about one, and a fitting receptacle.--I sow more
thought-seeds in twenty-four hours' travel over the desert-sand along
which my lonely consciousness paces day and night, than I shall throw
into soil where it will germinate, in a year.  All sorts of bodily and
mental perturbations come between us and the due projection of our
thought.  The pulse-like "fits of easy and difficult transmission" seem
to reach even the transparent medium through which our souls are seen.
We know our humanity by its often intercepted rays, as we tell a
revolving light from a star or meteor by its constantly recurring
obscuration.

An illustrious scholar once told me, that, in the first lecture he ever
delivered, he spoke but half his allotted time, and felt as if he had
told all he knew.  Braham came forward once to sing one of his most
famous and familiar songs, and for his life could not recall the first
line of it;--he told his mishap to the audience, and they screamed it at
him in a chorus of a thousand voices.  Milton could not write to suit
himself, except from the autumnal to the vernal equinox.  One in the
clothing-business, who, there is reason to suspect, may have inherited,
by descent, the great poet's impressible temperament, let a customer slip
through his fingers one day without fitting him with a new garment.
"Ah!" said he to a friend of mine, who was standing by, "if it hadn't
been for that confounded headache of mine this morning, I'd have had a
coat on that man, in spite of himself, before he left-the store."  A
passing throb, only,--but it deranged the nice mechanism required to
persuade the accidental human being, X, into a given piece of broadcloth,
A.

We must take care not to confound this frequent difficulty of
transmission of our ideas with want of ideas.  I suppose that a man's
mind does in time form a neutral salt with the elements in the universe
for which it has special elective affinities.  In fact, I look upon a
library as a kind of mental chemist's shop filled with the crystals of
all forms and hues which have come from the union of individual thought
with local circumstances or universal principles.

When a man has worked out his special affinities in this way, there is an
end of his genius as a real solvent.  No more effervescence and hissing
tumult--as he pours his sharp thought on the world's biting alkaline
unbeliefs!  No more corrosion of the old monumental tablets covered with
lies!  No more taking up of dull earths, and turning them, first into
clear solutions, and then into lustrous prisms!

I, the Professor, am very much like other men: I shall not find out when
I have used up my affinities.  What a blessed thing it is, that Nature,
when she invented, manufactured, and patented her authors, contrived to
make critics out of the chips that were left!  Painful as the task is,
they never fail to warn the author, in the most impressive manner, of the
probabilities of failure in what he has undertaken.  Sad as the necessity
is to their delicate sensibilities, they never hesitate to advertise him
of the decline of his powers, and to press upon him the propriety of
retiring before he sinks into imbecility.  Trusting to their kind
offices, I shall endeavor to fulfil--

--Bridget enters and begins clearing the table.

--The following poem is my (The Professor's) only contribution to the
great department of Ocean-Cable literature.  As all the poets of this
country will be engaged for the next six weeks in writing for the premium
offered by the Crystal-Palace Company for the Burns Centenary, (so
called, according to our Benjamin Franklin, because there will be nary a
cent for any of us,) poetry will be very scarce and dear.  Consumers may,
consequently, be glad to take the present article, which, by the aid of a
Latin tutor--and a Professor of Chemistry, will be found intelligible to
the educated classes.



                       DE SAUTY

              AN ELECTRO-CHEMICAL ECLOGUE.

              Professor.       Blue-Nose.

     PROFESSOR.

     Tell me, O Provincial! speak, Ceruleo-Nasal!
     Lives there one De Sauty extant now among you,
     Whispering Boanerges, son of silent thunder,
     Holding talk with nations?

     Is there a De Sauty, ambulant on Tellus,
     Bifid-cleft like mortals, dormient in night-cap,
     Having sight, smell, hearing, food-receiving feature
     Three times daily patent?

     Breathes there such a being, O Ceruleo-Nasal?
     Or is he a mythus,--ancient word for "humbug,"
     --Such as Livy told about the wolf that wet-nursed
     Romulus and Remus?

     Was he born of woman, this alleged De Sauty?
     Or a living product of galvanic action,
     Like the status bred in Crosses flint-solution?
     Speak, thou Cyano-Rhinal!


     BLUE-NOSE.

     Many things thou askest, jackknife-bearing stranger,
     Much-conjecturing mortal, pork-and-treacle-waster!
     Pretermit thy whittling, wheel thine ear-flap toward me,
     Thou shalt hear them answered.

     When the charge galvanic tingled through the cable,
     At the polar focus of the wire electric
     Suddenly appeared a white-faced man among us
     Called himself "DE SAUTY."

     As the small opossum held in pouch maternal
     Grasps the nutrient organ whence the term mammalia,
     So the unknown stranger held the wire electric,
     Sucking in the current.

     When the current strengthened, bloomed the pale-faced stranger,
     Took no drink nor victual, yet grew fat and rosy,
     And from time to time, in sharp articulation,
     Said, "All right!  DE SAUTY."

     From the lonely station passed the utterance, spreading
     Through the pines and hemlocks to the groves of steeples
     Till the land was filled with loud reverberations
     Of "All right!  DE SAUTY."

     When the current slackened, drooped the mystic stranger,
     Faded, faded, faded, as the stream grew weaker,
     Wasted to a shadow, with a hartshorn odor
     Of disintegration.

     Drops of deliquescence glistened on his forehead,
     Whitened round his feet the dust of efflorescence,
     Till one Monday morning, when the flow suspended,
     There was no De Sauty.

     Nothing but a cloud of elements organic,
     C. O. H. N. Ferrum, Chor.  Flu.  Sil.  Potassa,
     Calc.  Sod.  Phosph.  Mag.  Sulphur, Mang.(?) Alumin.(?) Cuprum,(?)
     Such as man is made of.

     Born of stream galvanic, with it he had perished!
     There is no De Sauty now there is no current!
     Give us a new cable, then again we'll hear him
     Cry, "All right!  DE SAUTY."




II

Back again!--A turtle--which means a tortoise--is fond of his shell; but
if you put a live coal on his back, he crawls out of it.  So the boys
say.

It is a libel on the turtle.  He grows to his shell, and his shell is in
his body as much as his body is in his shell.--I don't think there is one
of our boarders quite so testudineous as I am.  Nothing but a combination
of motives, more peremptory than the coal on the turtle's back, could
have got me to leave the shelter of my carapace; and after memorable
interviews, and kindest hospitalities, and grand sights, and huge influx
of patriotic pride,--for every American owns all America,--

          "Creation's heir,--the world, the world is"

his, if anybody's,--I come back with the feeling which a boned turkey
might experience, if, retaining his consciousness, he were allowed to
resume his skeleton.

Welcome, O Fighting Gladiator, and Recumbent Cleopatra, and Dying
Warrior, whose classic outlines (reproduced in the calcined mineral of
Lutetia) crown my loaded shelves!  Welcome, ye triumphs of pictorial art
(repeated by the magic graver) that look down upon me from the walls of
my sacred cell!  Vesalius, as Titian drew him, high-fronted, still-eyed,
thick-bearded, with signet-ring, as beseems a gentleman, with book and
carelessly-held eyeglass, marking him a scholar; thou, too, Jan Kuyper,
commonly called Jan Praktiseer, old man of a century and seven years
besides, father of twenty sons and two daughters, cut in copper by
Houbraken, bought from a portfolio on one of the Paris quais; and ye
Three Trees of Rembrandt, black in shadow against the blaze of light; and
thou Rosy Cottager of Sir Joshua, roses hinted by the peppery burin of
Bartolozzi; ye, too, of lower grades in nature, yet not unlovely for
unrenowned, Young Bull of Paulus Potter, and sleeping Cat of Cornelius
Visscher; welcome once more to my eyes!  The old books look out from the
shelves, and I seem to read on their backs something asides their
titles,--a kind of solemn greeting.  The crimson carpet flushes warm
under my feet.  The arm-chair hugs me; the swivel-chair spins round with
me, as if it were giddy with pleasure; the vast recumbent fauteuil
stretches itself out under my weight, as one joyous with food and wine
stretches in after-dinner laughter.

The boarders were pleased to say that they were glad to get me back. One
of them ventured a compliment, namely,--that I talked as if I believed
what I said.--This was apparently considered something unusual, by its
being mentioned.

One who means to talk with entire sincerity,--I said,--always feels
himself in danger of two things, namely,--an affectation of bluntness,
like that of which Cornwall accuses Kent in "Lear," and actual rudeness.
What a man wants to do, in talking with a stranger, is to get and to give
as much of the best and most real life that belongs to the two talkers as
the time will let him.  Life is short, and conversation apt to run to
mere words.  Mr. Hue I think it is, who tells us some very good stories
about the way in which two Chinese gentlemen contrive to keep up a long
talk without saying a word which has any meaning in it.  Something like
this is occasionally heard on this side of the Great Wall.  The best
Chinese talkers I know are some pretty women whom I meet from time to
time. Pleasant, airy, complimentary, the little flakes of flattery
glimmering in their talk like the bits of gold-leaf in eau-de-vie de
Dantzic; their accents flowing on in a soft ripple,--never a wave, and
never a calm; words nicely fitted, but never a colored phrase or a
highly-flavored epithet; they turn air into syllables so gracefully, that
we find meaning for the music they make as we find faces in the coals and
fairy palaces in the clouds.  There is something very odd, though, about
this mechanical talk.

You have sometimes been in a train on the railroad when the engine was
detached a long way from the station you were approaching?  Well, you
have noticed how quietly and rapidly the cars kept on, just as if the
locomotive were drawing them?  Indeed, you would not have suspected that
you were travelling on the strength of a dead fact, if you had not seen
the engine running away from you on a side-track. Upon my conscience, I
believe some of these pretty women detach their minds entirely,
sometimes, from their talk,--and, what is more, that we never know the
difference.  Their lips let off the fluty syllables just as their fingers
would sprinkle the music-drops from their pianos; unconscious habit turns
the phrase of thought into words just as it does that of music into
notes.--Well, they govern the world for all that, these sweet-lipped
women,--because beauty is the index of a larger fact than wisdom.

--The Bombazine wanted an explanation.

Madam,--said I,--wisdom is the abstract of the past, but beauty is the
promise of the future.

--All this, however, is not what I was going to say.  Here am I, suppose,
seated--we will say at a dinner-table--alongside of an intelligent
Englishman.  We look in each other's faces,--we exchange a dozen words.
One thing is settled: we mean not to offend each other,--to be perfectly
courteous,--more than courteous; for we are the entertainer and the
entertained, and cherish particularly amiable feelings, to each other.
The claret is good; and if our blood reddens a little with its warm
crimson, we are none the less kind for it.

I don't think people that talk over their victuals are like to say
anything very great, especially if they get their heads muddled with
strong drink before they begin jabberin'.

The Bombazine uttered this with a sugary sourness, as if the words had
been steeped in a solution of acetate of lead.--The boys of my time used
to call a hit like this a "side-winder."

--I must finish this woman.--

Madam,--I said,--the Great Teacher seems to have been fond of talking as
he sat at meat.  Because this was a good while ago, in a far-off place,
you forget what the true fact of it was,--that those were real dinners,
where people were hungry and thirsty, and where you met a very
miscellaneous company.  Probably there was a great deal of loose talk
among the guests; at any rate, there was always wine, we may believe.

Whatever may be the hygienic advantages or disadvantages of wine,--and I
for one, except for certain particular ends, believe in water, and, I
blush to say it, in black tea,--there is no doubt about its being the
grand specific against dull dinners.  A score of people come together in
all moods of mind and body.  The problem is, in the space of one hour,
more or less, to bring them all into the same condition of slightly
exalted life.  Food alone is enough for one person, perhaps,--talk,
alone, for another; but the grand equalizer and fraternizer, which works
up the radiators to their maximum radiation, and the absorbents to their
maximum receptivity, is now just where it was when

          The conscious water saw its Lord and blushed,

--when six great vessels containing water, the whole amounting to more
than a hogshead-full, were changed into the best of wine.  I once wrote a
song about wine, in which I spoke so warmly of it, that I was afraid some
would think it was written inter pocula; whereas it was composed in the
bosom of my family, under the most tranquillizing domestic influences.

--The divinity-student turned towards me, looking mischievous.--Can you
tell me,--he said,--who wrote a song for a temperance celebration once,
of which the following is a verse?

     Alas for the loved one, too gentle and fair
     The joys of the banquet to chasten and share!
     Her eye lost its light that his goblet might shine,
     And the rose of her cheek was dissolved in his wine!

I did,--I answered.--What are you going to do about it?--I will tell you
another line I wrote long ago:--

     Don't be "consistent,"--but be simply true.

The longer I live, the more I am satisfied of two things: first, that the
truest lives are those that are cut rose-diamond-fashion, with many
facets answering to the many-planed aspects of the world about them;
secondly, that society is always trying in some way or other to grind us
down to a single flat surface.  It is hard work to resist this
grinding-down action.--Now give me a chance.  Better eternal and
universal abstinence than the brutalities of those days that made wives
and mothers and daughters and sisters blush for those whom they should
have honored, as they came reeling home from their debauches! Yet better
even excess than lying and hypocrisy; and if wine is upon all our tables,
let us praise it for its color and fragrance and social tendency, so far
as it deserves, and not hug a bottle in the closet and pretend not to
know the use of a wine-glass at a public dinner!  I think you will find
that people who honestly mean to be true really contradict themselves
much more rarely than those who try to be "consistent."  But a great many
things we say can be made to appear contradictory, simply because they
are partial views of a truth, and may often look unlike at first, as a
front view of a face and its profile often do.

Here is a distinguished divine, for whom I have great respect, for I owe
him a charming hour at one of our literary anniversaries, and he has
often spoken noble words; but he holds up a remark of my friend the
"Autocrat,"--which I grieve to say he twice misquotes, by omitting the
very word which gives it its significance,--the word fluid, intended to
typify the mobility of the restricted will,--holds it up, I say, as if it
attacked the reality of the self-determining principle, instead of
illustrating its limitations by an image.  Now I will not explain any
farther, still less defend, and least of all attack, but simply quote a
few lines from one of my friend's poems, printed more than ten years ago,
and ask the distinguished gentleman where he has ever asserted more
strongly or absolutely the independent will of the "subcreative centre,"
as my heretical friend has elsewhere called man.

   --Thought, conscience, will, to make them all thy own
     He rent a pillar from the eternal throne!
   --Made in His image, thou must nobly dare
     The thorny crown of sovereignty to share.
   --Think not too meanly of thy low estate;
     Thou hast a choice; to choose is to create!

If he will look a little closely, he will see that the profile and the
full-face views of the will are both true and perfectly consistent!

Now let us come back, after this long digression, to the conversation
with the intelligent Englishman.  We begin skirmishing with a few light
ideas,--testing for thoughts,--as our electro-chemical friend, De Sauty,
if there were such a person, would test for his current; trying a little
litmus-paper for acids, and then a slip of turmeric-paper for alkalies,
as chemists do with unknown compounds; flinging the lead, and looking at
the shells and sands it brings up to find out whether we are like to keep
in shallow water, or shall have to drop the deep-sea line;--in short,
seeing what we have to deal with. If the Englishman gets his H's pretty
well placed, he comes from one of the higher grades of the British social
order, and we shall find him a good companion.

But, after all, here is a great fact between us.  We belong to two
different civilizations, and, until we recognize what separates us, we
are talking like Pyramus and Thisbe, without any hole in the wall to talk
through.  Therefore, on the whole, if he were a superior fellow,
incapable of mistaking it for personal conceit, I think I would let out
the fact of the real American feeling about Old-World folks.  They are
children to us in certain points of view.  They are playing with toys we
have done with for whole-generations.

--------FOOTNOTE:
The more I have observed and reflected, the more limited seems to me the
field of action of the human will. Every act of choice involves a special
relation between the ego and the conditions before it.  But no man knows
what forces are at work in the determination of his ego. The bias which
decides his choice between two or more motives may come from some
unsuspected ancestral source, of which he knows nothing at all.  He is
automatic in virtue of that hidden spring of reflex action, all the time
having the feeling that he is self-determining.  The Story of Elsie
Yenner, written-soon after this book was published, illustrates the
direction in which my thought was moving.  'The imaginary subject of the
story obeyed her will, but her will Obeyed the mysterious antenatal
poisoning influence.
--------

That silly little drum they are always beating on, and the trumpet and
the feather they make so much noise and cut such a figure with, we have
not quite outgrown, but play with much less seriously and constantly than
they do.  Then there is a whole museum of wigs, and masks, and
lace-coats, and gold-sticks, and grimaces, and phrases, which we laugh at
honestly, without affectation, that are still used in the Old-World
puppet-shows.  I don't think we on our part ever understand the
Englishman's concentrated loyalty and specialized reverence.  But then we
do think more of a man, as such, (barring some little difficulties about
race and complexion which the Englishman will touch us on presently,)
than any people that ever lived did think of him.  Our reverence is a
great deal wider, if it is less intense.  We have caste among us, to some
extent; it is true; but there is never a collar on the American wolf-dog
such as you often see on the English mastiff, notwithstanding his robust,
hearty individuality.

This confronting of two civilizations is always a grand sensation to me;
it is like cutting through the isthmus and letting the two oceans swim
into each other's laps.  The trouble is, it is so difficult to let out
the whole American nature without its self-assertion seeming to take a
personal character.  But I never enjoy the Englishman so much as when he
talks of church and king like Manco Capac among the Peruvians.  Then you
get the real British flavor, which the cosmopolite Englishman loses.

How much better this thorough interpenetration of ideas than a barren
interchange of courtesies, or a bush-fighting argument, in which each man
tries to cover as much of himself and expose as much of his opponent as
the tangled thicket of the disputed ground will let him!

---My thoughts flow in layers or strata, at least three deep.  I follow a
slow person's talk, and keep a perfectly clear under-current of my own
beneath it.  Under both runs obscurely a consciousness belonging to a
third train of reflections, independent of the two others.  I will try to
write out a Mental movement in three parts.

A.---First voice, or Mental Soprano,--thought follows a woman talking.

B.--Second voice, or Mental Barytone,--my running accompaniment.

C.--Third voice, or Mental Basso,--low grumble of importunate
self-repeating idea.

A.--White lace, three skirts, looped with flowers, wreath of
apple-blossoms, gold bracelets, diamond pin and ear-rings, the most
delicious berthe you ever saw, white satin slippers--

B.--Deuse take her!  What a fool she is!  Hear her chatter!  (Look out of
window just here.--Two pages and a half of description, if it were all
written out, in one tenth of a second.)--Go ahead, old lady! (Eye catches
picture over fireplace.) There's that infernal family nose!  Came over in
the "Mayflower" on the first old fool's face. Why don't they wear a ring
in it?

C.--You 'll be late at lecture,--late at lecture,--late,--late--

I observe that a deep layer of thought sometimes makes itself felt
through the superincumbent strata, thus:--The usual single or double
currents shall flow on, but there shall be an influence blending with
them, disturbing them in an obscure way, until all at once I say,--Oh,
there!  I knew there was something troubling me,--and the thought which
had been working through comes up to the surface clear, definite, and
articulates itself,--a disagreeable duty, perhaps, or an unpleasant
recollection.

The inner world of thought and the outer world of events are alike in
this, that they are both brimful.  There is no space between consecutive
thoughts, or between the never-ending series of actions. All pack tight,
and mould their surfaces against each other, so that in the long run
there is a wonderful average uniformity in the forms of both thoughts and
actions, just as you find that cylinders crowded all become hexagonal
prisms, and spheres pressed together are formed into regular polyhedra.

Every event that a man would master must be mounted on the run, and no
man ever caught the reins of a thought except as it galloped by him.  So,
to carry out, with another comparison, my remark about the layers of
thought, we may consider the mind as it moves among thoughts or events,
like a circus-rider whirling round with a great troop of horses.  He can
mount a fact or an idea, and guide it more or less completely, but he
cannot stop it.  So, as I said in another way at the beginning, he can
stride two or three thoughts at once, but not break their steady walk,
trot, or gallop.  He can only take his foot from the saddle of one
thought and put it on that of another.

--What is the saddle of a thought?  Why, a word, of course.--Twenty years
after you have dismissed a thought, it suddenly wedges up to you through
the press, as if it had been steadily galloping round and round all that
time without a rider.

The will does not act in the interspaces of thought, for there are no
such interspaces, but simply steps from the back of one moving thought
upon that of another.

--I should like to ask,--said the divinity-student,--since we are getting
into metaphysics, how you can admit space, if all things are in contact,
and how you can admit time, if it is always now to something?

--I thought it best not to hear this question.

--I wonder if you know this class of philosophers in books or elsewhere.
One of them makes his bow to the public, and exhibits an unfortunate
truth bandaged up so that it cannot stir hand or foot,--as helpless,
apparently, and unable to take care of itself, as an Egyptian mummy.  He
then proceeds, with the air and method of a master, to take off the
bandages.  Nothing can be neater than the way in which he does it.  But
as he takes off layer after layer, the truth seems to grow smaller and
smaller, and some of its outlines begin to look like something we have
seen before.  At last, when he has got them all off, and the truth struts
out naked, we recognize it as a diminutive and familiar acquaintance whom
we have known in the streets all our lives.  The fact is, the philosopher
has coaxed the truth into his study and put all those bandages on; or
course it is not very hard for him to take them off.  Still, a great many
people like to watch the process,--he does it so neatly!

Dear! dear!  I am ashamed to write and talk, sometimes, when I see how
those functions of the large-brained, thumb-opposing plantigrade are
abused by my fellow-vertebrates,--perhaps by myself.  How they spar for
wind, instead of hitting from the shoulder!

--The young fellow called John arose and placed himself in a neat
fighting attitude.--Fetch on the fellah that makes them long words!--he
said,--and planted a straight hit with the right fist in the concave palm
of the left hand with a click like a cup and ball.--You small boy there,
hurry up that "Webster's Unabridged!"

The little gentleman with the malformation, before described, shocked the
propriety of the breakfast-table by a loud utterance of three words, of
which the two last were "Webster's Unabridged," and the first was an
emphatic monosyllable.--Beg pardon,--he added,--forgot myself.  But let
us have an English dictionary, if we are to have any.  I don't believe in
clipping the coin of the realm, Sir!  If I put a weathercock on my house,
Sir, I want it to tell which way the wind blows up aloft,--off from the
prairies to the ocean, or off from the ocean to the prairies, or any way
it wants to blow!  I don't want a weathercock with a winch in an old
gentleman's study that he can take hold of and turn, so that the vane
shall point west when the great wind overhead is blowing east with all
its might, Sir!  Wait till we give you a dictionary; Sir!  It takes
Boston to do that thing, Sir!

--Some folks think water can't run down-hill anywhere out of Boston,
--remarked the Koh-i-noor.

I don't know what some folks think so well as I know what some fools
say,--rejoined the Little Gentleman.--If importing most dry goods made
the best scholars, I dare say you would know where to look for 'em.--Mr.
Webster could n't spell, Sir, or would n't spell, Sir,--at any rate, he
did n't spell; and the end of it was a fight between the owners of some
copyrights and the dignity of this noble language which we have inherited
from our English fathers.  Language!--the blood of the soul, Sir! into
which our thoughts run and out of which they grow!  We know what a word
is worth here in Boston.  Young Sam Adams got up on the stage at
Commencement, out at Cambridge there, with his gown on, the Governor and
Council looking on in the name of his Majesty, King George the Second,
and the girls looking down out of the galleries, and taught people how to
spell a word that was n't in the Colonial dictionaries!  R-e, re, s-i-s,
sis, t-a-n-c-e, tance, Resistance!  That was in '43, and it was a good
many years before the Boston boys began spelling it with their
muskets;--but when they did begin, they spelt it so loud that the old
bedridden women in the English almshouses heard every syllable!  Yes,
yes, yes,--it was a good while before those other two Boston boys got the
class so far along that it could spell those two hard words, Independence
and Union!  I tell you what, Sir, there are a thousand lives, aye,
sometimes a million, go to get a new word into a language that is worth
speaking.  We know what language means too well here in Boston to play
tricks with it.  We never make a new word til we have made a new thing or
a new thought, Sir! then we shaped the new mould of this continent, we
had to make a few.  When, by God's permission, we abrogated the primal
curse of maternity, we had to make a word or two.  The cutwater of this
great Leviathan clipper, the OCCIDENTAL,--this thirty-wasted
wind-and-steam wave-crusher,--must throw a little spray over the human
vocabulary as it splits the waters of a new world's destiny!

He rose as he spoke, until his stature seemed to swell into the fair
human proportions.  His feet must have been on the upper round of his
high chair; that was the only way I could account for it.

Puts her through fast-rate,--said the young fellow whom the boarders call
John.

The venerable and kind-looking old gentleman who sits opposite said he
remembered Sam Adams as Governor.  An old man in a brown coat. Saw him
take the Chair on Boston Common.  Was a boy then, and remembers sitting
on the fence in front of the old Hancock house. Recollects he had a
glazed 'lectionbun, and sat eating it and looking down on to the Common.
Lalocks flowered late that year, and he got a great bunch off from the
bushes in the Hancock front-yard.

Them 'lection-buns are no go,--said the young man John, so called.--I
know the trick.  Give a fellah a fo'penny bun in the mornin', an' he
downs the whole of it.  In about an hour it swells up in his stomach as
big as a football, and his feedin' 's spilt for that day. That's the way
to stop off a young one from eatin' up all the 'lection dinner.

Salem!  Salem! not Boston,--shouted the little man.

But the Koh-i-noor laughed a great rasping laugh, and the boy Benjamin
Franklin looked sharp at his mother, as if he remembered the
bun-experiment as a part of his past personal history.

The Little Gentleman was holding a fork in his left hand.  He stabbed a
boulder of home-made bread with it, mechanically, and looked at it as if
it ought to shriek.  It did not,--but he sat as if watching it.

--Language is a solemn thing,--I said.--It grows out of life,--out of its
agonies and ecstasies, its wants and its weariness.  Every language is a
temple, in which the soul of those who speak it is enshrined.  Because
time softens its outlines and rounds the sharp angles of its cornices,
shall a fellow take a pickaxe to help time? Let me tell you what comes of
meddling with things that can take care of themselves.--A friend of mine
had a watch given him, when he was a boy,--a "bull's eye," with a loose
silver case that came off like an oyster-shell from its contents; you
know them,--the cases that you hang on your thumb, while the core, or the
real watch, lies in your hand as naked as a peeled apple.  Well, he began
with taking off the case, and so on from one liberty to another, until he
got it fairly open, and there were the works, as good as if they were
alive,--crown-wheel, balance-wheel, and all the rest.  All right except
one thing,--there was a confounded little hair had got tangled round the
balance-wheel.  So my young Solomon got a pair of tweezers, and caught
hold of the hair very nicely, and pulled it right out, without touching
any of the wheels,--when,--buzzzZZZ! and the watch had done up
twenty-four hours in double magnetic-telegraph time!--The English
language was wound up to run some thousands of years, I trust; but if
everybody is to be pulling at everything he thinks is a hair, our
grandchildren will have to make the discovery that it is a hair-spring,
and the old Anglo-Norman soul's-timekeeper will run down, as so many
other dialects have done before it.  I can't stand this meddling any
better than you, Sir.  But we have a great deal to be proud of in the
lifelong labors of that old lexicographer, and we must n't be ungrateful.
Besides, don't let us deceive ourselves,--the war of the dictionaries is
only a disguised rivalry of cities, colleges, and especially of
publishers.  After all, it is likely that the language will shape itself
by larger forces than phonography and dictionary-making.  You may spade
up the ocean as much as you like, and harrow it afterwards, if you
can,--but the moon will still lead the tides, and the winds will form
their surface.

--Do you know Richardson's Dictionary?--I said to my neighbor the
divinity-student.

Haow?--said the divinity-student.--He colored, as he noticed on my face a
twitch in one of the muscles which tuck up the corner of the mouth,
(zygomaticus major,) and which I could not hold back from making a little
movement on its own account.

It was too late.--A country-boy, lassoed when he was a half-grown colt.
Just as good as a city-boy, and in some ways, perhaps, better,--but
caught a little too old not to carry some marks of his earlier ways of
life.  Foreigners, who have talked a strange tongue half their lives,
return to the language of their childhood in their dying hours.
Gentlemen in fine linen, and scholars in large libraries, taken by
surprise, or in a careless moment, will sometimes let slip a word they
knew as boys in homespun and have not spoken since that time,--but it lay
there under all their culture.  That is one way you may know the
country-boys after they have grown rich or celebrated; another is by the
odd old family names, particularly those of the Hebrew prophets, which
the good old people have saddled them with.

--Boston has enough of England about it to make a good English
dictionary,--said that fresh-looking youth whom I have mentioned as
sitting at the right upper corner of the table.

I turned and looked him full in the face,--for the pure, manly
intonations arrested me.  The voice was youthful, but full of
character.--I suppose some persons have a peculiar susceptibility in the
matter of voice.--Hear this.

Not long after the American Revolution, a young lady was sitting in her
father's chaise in a street of this town of Boston.  She overheard a
little girl talking or singing, and was mightily taken with the tones of
her voice.  Nothing would satisfy her but she must have that little girl
come and live in her father's house.  So the child came, being then nine
years old.  Until her marriage she remained under the same roof with the
young lady.  Her children became successively inmates of the lady's
dwelling; and now, seventy years, or thereabouts, since the young lady
heard the child singing, one of that child's children and one of her
grandchildren are with her in that home, where she, no longer young,
except in heart, passes her peaceful days.--Three generations linked
together by so light a breath of accident!

I liked--the sound of this youth's voice, I said, and his look when I
came to observe him a little more closely.  His complexion had something
better than the bloom and freshness which had first attracted me;--it had
that diffused tone which is a sure index of wholesome, lusty life.  A
fine liberal style of nature seemed to be: hair crisped, moustache
springing thick and dark, head firmly planted, lips finished, as is
commonly sees them in gentlemen's families, a pupil well contracted, and
a mouth that opened frankly with a white flash of teeth that looked as if
they could serve him as they say Ethan Allen's used to serve their
owner,--to draw nails with.  This is the kind of fellow to walk a
frigate's deck and bowl his broadsides into the "Gadlant Thudnder-bomb,"
or any forty-port-holed adventurer who would like to exchange a few tons
of iron compliments.--I don't know what put this into my head, for it was
not till some time afterward I learned the young fellow had been in the
naval school at Annapolis.  Something had happened to change his plan of
life, and he was now studying engineering and architecture in Boston.

When the youth made the short remark which drew my attention to him, the
little deformed gentleman turned round and took a long look at him.

Good for the Boston boy!--he said.

I am not a Boston boy,--said the youth, smiling,--I am a Marylander.

I don't care where you come from,--we'll make a Boston man of you,--said
the little gentleman.  Pray, what part of Maryland did you come from, and
how shall I call you?

The poor youth had to speak pretty loud, as he was at the right upper
corner of the table, and the little gentleman next the lower left-hand
corner.  His face flushed a little, but he answered pleasantly, telling
who he was, as if the little man's infirmity gave him a right to ask any
questions he wanted to.

Here is the place for you to sit,--said the little gentleman, pointing to
the vacant chair next his own, at the corner.

You're go'n' to have a young lady next you, if you wait till
to-morrow,--said the landlady to him.

He did not reply, but I had a fancy that he changed color.  It can't be
that he has susceptibilities with reference to a contingent young lady!
It can't be that he has had experiences which make him sensitive!  Nature
could not be quite so cruel as to set a heart throbbing in that poor
little cage of ribs!  There is no use in wasting notes of admiration.  I
must ask the landlady about him.

These are some of the facts she furnished.--Has not been long with her.
Brought a sight of furniture,--could n't hardly get some of it upstairs.
Has n't seemed particularly attentive to the ladies.  The Bombazine (whom
she calls Cousin something or other) has tried to enter into conversation
with him, but retired with the impression that he was indifferent to
ladies' society.  Paid his bill the other day without saying a word about
it.  Paid it in gold,--had a great heap of twenty-dollar pieces.  Hires
her best room.  Thinks he is a very nice little man, but lives dreadful
lonely up in his chamber. Wants the care of some capable nuss.  Never
pitied anybody more in her life--never see a more interestin' person.

--My intention was, when I began making these notes, to let them consist
principally of conversations between myself and the other boarders.  So
they will, very probably; but my curiosity is excited about this little
boarder of ours, and my reader must not be disappointed, if I sometimes
interrupt a discussion to give an account of whatever fact or traits I
may discover about him.  It so happens that his room is next to mine, and
I have the opportunity of observing many of his ways without any active
movements of curiosity. That his room contains heavy furniture, that he
is a restless little body and is apt to be up late, that he talks to
himself, and keeps mainly to himself, is nearly all I have yet found out.

One curious circumstance happened lately which I mention without drawing
an absolute inference.  Being at the studio of a sculptor with whom I am
acquainted, the other day, I saw a remarkable cast of a left arm.  On my
asking where the model came from, he said it was taken direct from the
arm of a deformed person, who had employed one of the Italian moulders to
make the cast.  It was a curious case, it should seem, of one beautiful
limb upon a frame otherwise singularly imperfect--I have repeatedly
noticed this little gentleman's use of his left arm.  Can he have
furnished the model I saw at the sculptor's?

--So we are to have a new boarder to-morrow.  I hope there will be
something pretty and pleasing about her.  A woman with a creamy voice,
and finished in alto rilievo, would be a variety in the
boarding-house,--a little more marrow and a little less sinew than our
landlady and her daughter and the bombazine-clad female, all of whom are
of the turkey-drumstick style of organization.  I don't mean that these
are our only female companions; but the rest being conversational
non-combatants, mostly still, sad feeders, who take in their food as
locomotives take in wood and water, and then wither away from the table
like blossoms that never came to fruit, I have not yet referred to them
as individuals.

I wonder what kind of young person we shall see in that empty chair
to-morrow!

--I read this song to the boarders after breakfast the other morning. It
was written for our fellows;--you know who they are, of course.



                         THE BOYS.

     Has there any old fellow got mixed with the boys?
     If there has, take him out, without making a noise!
     Hang the Almanac's cheat and the Catalogue's spite!
     Old Time is a liar!  We're twenty to-night!

     We're twenty!  We're twenty!  Who says we are more?
     He's tipsy,--young jackanapes!--show him the door!
     --"Gray temples at twenty?"--Yes! white, if we please;
     Where the snow-flakes fall thickest there's nothing can freeze!

     Was it snowing I spoke of?  Excuse the mistake!
     Look close,--you will see not a sign of a flake;
     We want some new garlands for those we have shed,
     And these are white roses in place of the red!

     We've a trick, we young fellows, you may have been told.
     Of talking (in public) as if we were old;
     That boy we call Doctor, (1) and this we call Judge (2)
     --It's a neat little fiction,--of course it's all fudge.

     That fellow's the Speaker, (3)--the one on the right;
     Mr. Mayor, (4) my young one, how are you to-night?
     That's our "Member of Congress,"(5) we say when we chaff;
     There's the "Reverend" (6) What's his name?--don't make me laugh!

     That boy with the grave mathematical look(7)
     Made believe he had written a wonderful book,
     And the ROYAL SOCIETY thought it was true!
     So they chose him right in; a good joke it was, too.

     There's a boy,--we pretend,--with a three-decker-brain
     That could harness a team with a logical chain:
     When he spoke for our manhood in syllabled fire,
     We called him "The Justice,"--but now he's "The Squire."(1)

     And there's a nice youngster of excellent pith,(2)
     Fate tried to conceal him by naming him Smith,
     But he shouted a song for the brave and the free,
     --Just read on his medal,--"My country,--of thee!"

     You hear that boy laughing?--you think he's all fun,
     But the angels laugh, too, at the good he has done;
     The children laugh loud as they troop to his call,
     And the poor man that knows him laughs loudest of all!(3)

     Yes, we're boys,--always playing with tongue or with pen,
     --And I sometimes have asked,--Shall we ever be men?
     Shall we always be youthful and laughing and gay,
     Till the last dear companion drops smiling away?

     Then here's to our boyhood, its gold and its gray!
     The stars of its Winter, the dews of its May!
     And when we have done with our life-lasting toys,
     Dear Father, take care of thy children, the Boys!

     1 Francis Thomas.
     2 George Tyler Bigelow.
     3 Francis Boardman Crowninshield.
     4 G. W. Richardson.
     5 George Thomas Davis.
     6 James Freeman Clarke.
     7 Benjamin Peirce.




III

[The Professor talks with the Reader.  He tells a Young Girl's Story.]

When the elements that went to the making of the first man, father of
mankind, had been withdrawn from the world of unconscious matter, the
balance of creation was disturbed.  The materials that go to the making
of one woman were set free by the abstraction from inanimate nature of
one man's-worth of masculine constituents.  These combined to make our
first mother, by a logical necessity involved in the previous creation of
our common father.  All this, mythically, illustratively, and by no means
doctrinally or polemically.

The man implies the woman, you will understand.  The excellent gentleman
whom I had the pleasure of setting right in a trifling matter a few weeks
ago believes in the frequent occurrence of miracles at the present day.
So do I.  I believe, if you could find an uninhabited coral-reef island,
in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, with plenty of cocoa-palms and
bread-fruit on it, and put a handsome young fellow, like our Marylander,
ashore upon it, if you touched there a year afterwards, you would find
him walking under the palm-trees arm in arm with a pretty woman.

Where would she come from?

Oh, that 's the miracle!

--I was just as certain, when I saw that fine, high-colored youth at the
upper right-hand corner of our table, that there would appear some
fitting feminine counterpart to him, as if I had been a clairvoyant,
seeing it all beforehand.

--I have a fancy that those Marylanders are just about near enough to the
sun to ripen well.--How some of us fellows remember Joe and Harry,
Baltimoreans, both!  Joe, with his cheeks like lady-apples, and his eyes
like black-heart cherries, and his teeth like the whiteness of the flesh
of cocoanuts, and his laugh that set the chandelier-drops rattling
overhead, as we sat at our sparkling banquets in those gay times!  Harry,
champion, by acclamation, of the college heavy-weights, broad-shouldered,
bull-necked, square-jawed, six feet and trimmings, a little science, lots
of pluck, good-natured as a steer in peace, formidable as a red-eyed
bison in the crack of hand-to-hand battle!  Who forgets the great
muster-day, and the collision of the classic with the democratic forces?
The huge butcher, fifteen stone,--two hundred and ten pounds,--good
weight,--steps out like Telamonian Ajax, defiant.  No words from Harry,
the Baltimorean,--one of the quiet sort, who strike first; and do the
talking, if there is any, afterwards.  No words, but, in the place
thereof, a clean, straight, hard hit, which took effect with a spank like
the explosion of a percussion-cap, knocking the slayer of beeves down a
sand-bank,--followed, alas! by the too impetuous youth, so that both
rolled down together, and the conflict terminated in one of those
inglorious and inevitable Yankee clinches, followed by a general melee,
which make our native fistic encounters so different from such
admirably-ordered contests as that which I once saw at an English fair,
where everything was done decently and in order; and the fight began and
ended with such grave propriety, that a sporting parson need hardly have
hesitated to open it with a devout petition, and, after it was over,
dismiss the ring with a benediction.

I can't help telling one more story about this great field-day, though it
is the most wanton and irrelevant digression.  But all of us have a
little speck of fight underneath our peace and good-will to men, just a
speck, for revolutions and great emergencies, you know,--so that we
should not submit to be trodden quite flat by the first heavy-heeled
aggressor that came along.  You can tell a portrait from an ideal head, I
suppose, and a true story from one spun out of the writer's invention.
See whether this sounds true or not.

Admiral Sir Isaac Coffin sent out two fine blood-horses, Barefoot and
Serab by name, to Massachusetts, something before the time I am talking
of.  With them came a Yorkshire groom, a stocky little fellow, in velvet
breeches, who made that mysterious hissing noise, traditionary in English
stables, when he rubbed down the silken-skinned racers, in great
perfection.  After the soldiers had come from the muster-field, and some
of the companies were on the village-common, there was still some
skirmishing between a few individuals who had not had the fight taken out
of them.  The little Yorkshire groom thought he must serve out somebody.
So he threw himself into an approved scientific attitude, and, in brief,
emphatic language, expressed his urgent anxiety to accommodate any
classical young gentleman who chose to consider himself a candidate for
his attentions.  I don't suppose there were many of the college boys that
would have been a match for him in the art which Englishmen know so much
more of than Americans, for the most part.  However, one of the
Sophomores, a very quiet, peaceable fellow, just stepped out of the
crowd, and, running straight at the groom, as he stood there, sparring
away, struck him with the sole of his foot, a straight blow, as if it had
been with his fist, and knocked him heels over head and senseless, so
that he had to be carried off from the field.  This ugly way of hitting
is the great trick of the French gavate, which is not commonly thought
able to stand its ground against English pugilistic science.  These are
old recollections, with not much to recommend them, except, perhaps, a
dash of life, which may be worth a little something.

The young Marylander brought them all up, you may remember.  He recalled
to my mind those two splendid pieces of vitality I told you of.  Both
have been long dead. How often we see these great red-flaring flambeaux
of life blown out, as it were, by a puff of wind,--and the little,
single-wicked night-lamp of being, which some white-faced and attenuated
invalid shades with trembling fingers, flickering on while they go out
one after another, until its glimmer is all that is left to us of the
generation to which it belonged!

I told you that I was perfectly sure, beforehand, we should find some
pleasing girlish or womanly shape to fill the blank at our table and
match the dark-haired youth at the upper corner.

There she sits, at the very opposite corner, just as far off as accident
could put her from this handsome fellow, by whose side she ought, of
course, to be sitting.  One of the "positive" blondes, as my friend, you
may remember, used to call them.  Tawny-haired, amber-eyed,
full-throated, skin as white as a blanched almond.  Looks dreamy to me,
not self-conscious, though a black ribbon round her neck sets it off as a
Marie-Antoinette's diamond-necklace could not do.  So in her dress, there
is a harmony of tints that looks as if an artist had run his eye over her
and given a hint or two like the finishing touch to a picture.  I can't
help being struck with her, for she is at once rounded and fine in
feature, looks calm, as blondes are apt to, and as if she might run wild,
if she were trifled with.  It is just as I knew it would be,--and anybody
can see that our young Marylander will be dead in love with her in a
week.

Then if that little man would only turn out immensely rich and have the
good-nature to die and leave them all his money, it would be as nice as a
three-volume novel.

The Little Gentleman is in a flurry, I suspect, with the excitement of
having such a charming neighbor next him.  I judge so mainly by his
silence and by a certain rapt and serious look on his face, as if he were
thinking of something that had happened, or that might happen, or that
ought to happen,--or how beautiful her young life looked, or how hardly
Nature had dealt with him, or something which struck him silent, at any
rate.  I made several conversational openings for him, but he did not
fire up as he often does.  I even went so far as to indulge in, a fling
at the State House, which, as we all know, is in truth a very imposing
structure, covering less ground than St. Peter's, but of similar general
effect.  The little man looked up, but did not reply to my taunt.  He
said to the young lady, however, that the State House was the Parthenon
of our Acropolis, which seemed to please her, for she smiled, and he
reddened a little,--so I thought.  I don't think it right to watch
persons who are the subjects of special infirmity,--but we all do it.

I see that they have crowded the chairs a little at that end of the
table, to make room for another newcomer of the lady sort.  A
well-mounted, middle-aged preparation, wearing her hair without a cap,
--pretty wide in the parting, though,--contours vaguely hinted,
--features very quiet,--says little as yet, but seems to keep her eye on
the young lady, as if having some responsibility for her My record is a
blank for some days after this.  In the mean time I have contrived to
make out the person and the story of our young lady, who, according to
appearances, ought to furnish us a heroine for a boarding-house romance
before a year is out.  It is very curious that she should prove connected
with a person many of us have heard of.  Yet, curious as it is, I have
been a hundred times struck with the circumstance that the most remote
facts are constantly striking each other; just as vessels starting from
ports thousands of miles apart pass close to each other in the naked
breadth of the ocean, nay, sometimes even touch, in the dark, with a
crack of timbers, a gurgling of water, a cry of startled sleepers,--a cry
mysteriously echoed in warning dreams, as the wife of some Gloucester
fisherman, some coasting skipper, wakes with a shriek, calls the name of
her husband, and sinks back to uneasy slumbers upon her lonely pillow,--a
widow.

Oh, these mysterious meetings!  Leaving all the vague, waste, endless
spaces of the washing desert, the ocean-steamer and the fishing-smack
sail straight towards each other as if they ran in grooves ploughed for
them in the waters from the beginning of creation!  Not only things and
events, but our own thoughts, are so full of these surprises, that, if
there were a reader in my parish who did not recognize the familiar
occurrence of what I am now going to mention, I should think it a case
for the missionaries of the Society for the Propagation of Intelligence
among the Comfortable Classes. There are about as many twins in the
births of thought as of children.  For the first time in your lives you
learn some fact or come across some idea.  Within an hour, a day, a week,
that same fact or idea strikes you from another quarter.  It seems as if
it had passed into space and bounded back upon you as an echo from the
blank wall that shuts in the world of thought.  Yet no possible
connection exists between the two channels by which the thought or the
fact arrived.  Let me give an infinitesimal illustration.

One of the Boys mentioned, the other evening, in the course of a very
pleasant poem he read us, a little trick of the Commons-table boarders,
which I, nourished at the parental board, had never heard of.  Young
fellows being always hungry--Allow me to stop dead-short, in order to
utter an aphorism which has been forming itself in one of the blank
interior spaces of my intelligence, like a crystal in the cavity of a
geode.

               Aphorism by the Professor.

In order to know whether a human being is young or old, offer it food of
different kinds at short intervals.  If young, it will eat anything at
any hour of the day or night.  If old, it observes stated periods, and
you might as well attempt to regulate the time of highwater to suit a
fishing-party as to change these periods. The crucial experiment is this.
Offer a bulky and boggy bun to the suspected individual just ten minutes
before dinner.  If this is eagerly accepted and devoured, the fact of
youth is established.  If the subject of the question starts back and
expresses surprise and incredulity, as if you could not possibly be in
earnest, the fact of maturity is no less clear.

--Excuse me,--I return to my story of the Commons-table.--Young fellows
being always hungry, and tea and dry toast being the meagre fare of the
evening meal, it was a trick of some of the Boys to impale a slice of
meat upon a fork, at dinner-time, and stick the fork holding it beneath
the table, so that they could get it at tea-time.  The dragons that
guarded this table of the Hesperides found out the trick at last, and
kept a sharp look-out for missing forks;--they knew where to find one,
if it was not in its place.--Now the odd thing was, that, after waiting
so many years to hear of this college trick, I should hear it mentioned a
second time within the same twenty-four hours by a college youth of the
present generation. Strange, but true.  And so it has happened to me and
to every person, often and often, to be hit in rapid succession by these
twinned facts or thoughts, as if they were linked like chain-shot.

I was going to leave the simple reader to wonder over this, taking it as
an unexplained marvel.  I think, however, I will turn over a furrow of
subsoil in it.--The explanation is, of course, that in a great many
thoughts there must be a few coincidences, and these instantly arrest our
attention.  Now we shall probably never have the least idea of the
enormous number of impressions which pass through our consciousness,
until in some future life we see the photographic record of our thoughts
and the stereoscopic picture of our actions. There go more pieces to make
up a conscious life or a living body than you think for.  Why, some of
you were surprised when a friend of mine told you there were fifty-eight
separate pieces in a fiddle. How many "swimming glands"--solid,
organized, regularly formed, rounded disks taking an active part in all
your vital processes, part and parcel, each one of them, of your
corporeal being--do you suppose are whirled along, like pebbles in a
stream, with the blood which warms your frame and colors your cheeks?--A
noted German physiologist spread out a minute drop of blood, under the
microscope, in narrow streaks, and counted the globules, and then made a
calculation.  The counting by the micrometer took him a week.--You have,
my full-grown friend, of these little couriers in crimson or scarlet
livery, running on your vital errands day and night as long as you live,
sixty-five billions, five hundred and seventy thousand millions. Errors
excepted.--Did I hear some gentleman say, "Doubted? "--I am the
Professor.  I sit in my chair with a petard under it that will blow me
through the skylight of my lecture-room, if I do not know what I am
talking about and whom I am quoting.

Now, my dear friends, who are putting your hands to your foreheads, and
saying to yourselves that you feel a little confused, as if you had been
waltzing until things began to whirl slightly round you, is it possible
that you do not clearly apprehend the exact connection of all that I have
been saying, and its bearing on what is now to come? Listen, then.  The
number of these living elements in our bodies illustrates the
incalculable multitude of our thoughts; the number of our thoughts
accounts for those frequent coincidences spoken of; these coincidences in
the world of thought illustrate those which we constantly observe in the
world of outward events, of which the presence of the young girl now at
our table, and proving to be the daughter of an old acquaintance some of
us may remember, is the special example which led me through this
labyrinth of reflections, and finally lands me at the commencement of
this young girl's story, which, as I said, I have found the time and felt
the interest to learn something of, and which I think I can tell without
wronging the unconscious subject of my brief delineation.
IRIS.

You remember, perhaps, in some papers published awhile ago, an odd poem
written by an old Latin tutor?  He brought up at the verb amo, I love, as
all of us do, and by and by Nature opened her great living dictionary for
him at the word filia, a daughter.  The poor man was greatly perplexed in
choosing a name for her.  Lucretia and Virginia were the first that he
thought of; but then came up those pictured stories of Titus Livius,
which he could never read without crying, though he had read them a
hundred times.

--Lucretia sending for her husband and her father, each to bring one
friend with him, and awaiting them in her chamber.  To them her wrongs
briefly.  Let them see to the wretch,--she will take care of herself.
Then the hidden knife flashes out and sinks into her heart. She slides
from her seat, and falls dying.  "Her husband and her father cry
aloud."--No, not Lucretia.

-Virginius,--a brown old soldier, father of a nice girl.  She engaged to
a very promising young man.  Decemvir Appius takes a violent fancy to
her,--must have her at any rate.  Hires a lawyer to present the arguments
in favor of the view that she was another man's daughter. There used to
be lawyers in Rome that would do such things.--All right.   There are two
sides to everything.  Audi alteram partem. The legal gentleman has no
opinion,--he only states the evidence.--A doubtful case.  Let the young
lady be under the protection of the Honorable Decemvir until it can be
looked up thoroughly.--Father thinks it best, on the whole, to give in.
Will explain the matter, if the young lady and her maid will step this
way.  That is the explanation,--a stab with a butcher's knife, snatched
from a stall, meant for other lambs than this poor bleeding Virginia.

The old man thought over the story.  Then he must have one look at the
original.  So he took down the first volume and read it over. When he
came to that part where it tells how the young gentleman she was engaged
to and a friend of his took up the poor girl's bloodless shape and
carried it through the street, and how all the women followed, wailing,
and asking if that was what their daughters were coming to,--if that was
what they were to get for being good girls,--he melted down into his
accustomed tears of pity and grief, and, through them all, of delight at
the charming Latin of the narrative. But it was impossible to call his
child Virginia.  He could never look at her without thinking she had a
knife sticking in her bosom.

Dido would be a good name, and a fresh one.  She was a queen, and the
founder of a great city.  Her story had been immortalized by the greatest
of poets,--for the old Latin tutor clove to "Virgilius Maro," as he
called him, as closely as ever Dante did in his memorable journey.  So he
took down his Virgil, it was the smooth-leafed, open-lettered quarto of
Baskerville,--and began reading the loves and mishaps of Dido.  It would
n't do.  A lady who had not learned discretion by experience, and came to
an evil end.  He shook his head, as he sadly repeated,

    "---misera ante diem, subitoque accensa furore;"

but when he came to the lines,

    "Ergo Iris croceis per coelum roscida pennis
     Mille trahens varios adverso Sole colores,"

he jumped up with a great exclamation, which the particular recording
angel who heard it pretended not to understand, or it might have gone
hard with the Latin tutor some time or other.

"Iris shall be her name!"--he said.  So her name was Iris.

--The natural end of a tutor is to perish by starvation.  It is only a
question of time, just as with the burning of college libraries. These
all burn up sooner or later, provided they are not housed in brick or
stone and iron.  I don't mean that you will see in the registry of deaths
that this or that particular tutor died of well-marked, uncomplicated
starvation.  They may, even, in extreme cases, be carried off by a thin,
watery kind of apoplexy, which sounds very well in the returns, but means
little to those who know that it is only debility settling on the head.
Generally, however, they fade and waste away under various
pretexts,--calling it dyspepsia, consumption, and so on, to put a decent
appearance upon the case and keep up the credit of the family and the
institution where they have passed through the successive stages of
inanition.

In some cases it takes a great many years to kill a tutor by the process
in question.  You see they do get food and clothes and fuel, in
appreciable quantities, such as they are.  You will even notice rows of
books in their rooms, and a picture or two,--things that look as if they
had surplus money; but these superfluities are the water of
crystallization to scholars, and you can never get them away till the
poor fellows effloresce into dust.  Do not be deceived.  The tutor
breakfasts on coffee made of beans, edulcorated with milk watered to the
verge of transparency; his mutton is tough and elastic, up to the moment
when it becomes tired out and tasteless; his coal is a sullen, sulphurous
anthracite, which rusts into ashes, rather than burns, in the shallow
grate; his flimsy broadcloth is too thin for winter and too thick for
summer.  The greedy lungs of fifty hot-blooded boys suck the oxygen from
the air he breathes in his recitation-room.  In short, he undergoes a
process of gentle and gradual starvation.

--The mother of little Iris was not called Electra, like hers of the old
story, neither was her grandfather Oceanus.  Her blood-name, which she
gave away with her heart to the Latin tutor, was a plain old English one,
and her water-name was Hannah, beautiful as recalling the mother of
Samuel, and admirable as reading equally well from the initial letter
forwards and from the terminal letter backwards.  The poor lady, seated
with her companion at the chessboard of matrimony, had but just pushed
forward her one little white pawn upon an empty square, when the Black
Knight, that cares nothing for castles or kings or queens, swooped down
upon her and swept her from the larger board of life.

The old Latin tutor put a modest blue stone at the head of his late
companion, with her name and age and Eheu! upon it,--a smaller one at her
feet, with initials; and left her by herself, to be rained and snowed
on,--which is a hard thing to do for those whom we have cherished
tenderly.

About the time that the lichens, falling on the stone, like drops of
water, had spread into fair, round rosettes, the tutor had starved into a
slight cough.  Then he began to draw the buckle of his black trousers a
little tighter, and took in another reef in his never-ample waistcoat.
His temples got a little hollow, and the contrasts of color in his cheeks
more vivid than of old.  After a while his walks fatigued him, and he was
tired, and breathed hard after going up a flight or two of stairs.  Then
came on other marks of inward trouble and general waste, which he spoke
of to his physician as peculiar, and doubtless owing to accidental
causes; to all which the doctor listened with deference, as if it had not
been the old story that one in five or six of mankind in temperate
climates tells, or has told for him, as if it were something new.  As the
doctor went out, he said to himself,--"On the rail at last.
Accommodation train. A good many stops, but will get to the station by
and by."  So the doctor wrote a recipe with the astrological sign of
Jupiter before it, (just as your own physician does, inestimable reader,
as you will see, if you look at his next prescription,) and departed,
saying he would look in occasionally.  After this, the Latin tutor began
the usual course of "getting better," until he got so much better that
his face was very sharp, and when he smiled, three crescent lines showed
at each side of his lips, and when he spoke; it was in a muffled whisper,
and the white of his eye glistened as pearly as the purest porcelain,
--so much better, that he hoped--by spring--he--might be
able--to--attend------to his class again.--But he was recommended not to
expose himself, and so kept his chamber, and occasionally, not having
anything to do, his bed.  The unmarried sister with whom he lived took
care of him; and the child, now old enough to be manageable and even
useful in trifling offices, sat in the chamber, or played, about.

Things could not go on so forever, of course.  One morning his face was
sunken and his hands were very, very cold.  He was "better," he
whispered, but sadly and faintly.  After a while he grew restless and
seemed a little wandering.  His mind ran on his classics, and fell back
on the Latin grammar.

"Iris!" he said,--"filiola mea!"--The child knew this meant my dear
little daughter as well as if it had been English.--"Rainbow!" for he
would translate her name at times,--"come to me,--veni"--and his lips
went on automatically, and murmured, "vel venito!"--The child came and
sat by his bedside and took his hand, which she could not warm, but which
shot its rays of cold all through her slender frame.  But there she sat,
looking steadily at him.  Presently he opened his lips feebly, and
whispered, "Moribundus."  She did not know what that meant, but she saw
that there was something new and sad.  So she began to cry; but presently
remembering an old book that seemed to comfort him at times, got up and
brought a Bible in the Latin version, called the Vulgate.  "Open it," he
said,--"I will read, segnius irritant,--don't put the light out,--ah!
hoeret lateri,--I am going,--vale, vale, vale, goodbye, good-bye,--the
Lord take care of my child!  Domine, audi--vel audito!" His face whitened
suddenly, and he lay still, with open eyes and mouth.  He had taken his
last degree.

--Little Miss Iris could not be said to begin life with a very brilliant
rainbow over her, in a worldly point of view.  A limited wardrobe of
man's attire, such as poor tutors wear,--a few good books, principally
classics,--a print or two, and a plaster model of the Pantheon, with some
pieces of furniture which had seen service,--these, and a child's heart
full of tearful recollections and strange doubts and questions,
alternating with the cheap pleasures which are the anodynes of childish
grief; such were the treasures she inherited.--No,--I forgot.  With that
kindly sentiment which all of us feel for old men's first
children,--frost-flowers of the early winter season, the old tutor's
students had remembered him at a time when he was laughing and crying
with his new parental emotions, and running to the side of the plain crib
in which his alter egg, as he used to say, was swinging, to hang over the
little heap of stirring clothes, from which looked the minute, red,
downy, still, round face, with unfixed eyes and working lips,--in that
unearthly gravity which has never yet been broken by a smile, and which
gives to the earliest moon-year or two of an infant's life the character
of a first old age, to counterpoise that second childhood which there is
one chance in a dozen it may reach by and by.  The boys had remembered
the old man and young father at that tender period of his hard, dry life.
There came to him a fair, silver goblet, embossed with classical figures,
and bearing on a shield the graver words, Ex dono pupillorum.  The handle
on its side showed what use the boys had meant it for; and a kind letter
in it, written with the best of feeling, in the worst of Latin, pointed
delicately to its destination.  Out of this silver vessel, after a long,
desperate, strangling cry, which marked her first great lesson in the
realities of life, the child took the blue milk, such as poor tutors and
their children get, tempered with water, and sweetened a little, so as to
bring it nearer the standard established by the touching indulgence and
partiality of Nature,--who had mingled an extra allowance of sugar in the
blameless food of the child at its mother's breast, as compared with that
of its infant brothers and sisters of the bovine race.

But a willow will grow in baked sand wet with rainwater.  An air-plant
will grow by feeding on the winds.  Nay, those huge forests that
overspread great continents have built themselves up mainly from the
air-currents with which they are always battling.  The oak is but a
foliated atmospheric crystal deposited from the aerial ocean that holds
the future vegetable world in solution.  The storm that tears its leaves
has paid tribute to its strength, and it breasts the tornado clad in the
spoils of a hundred hurricanes.

Poor little Iris!  What had she in common with the great oak in the
shadow of which we are losing sight of her?--She lived and grew like
that,--this was all.  The blue milk ran into her veins and filled them
with thin, pure blood.  Her skin was fair, with a faint tinge, such as
the white rosebud shows before it opens.  The doctor who had attended
her father was afraid her aunt would hardly be able to "raise"
her,--"delicate child,"--hoped she was not consumptive,--thought
there was a fair chance she would take after her father.

A very forlorn-looking person, dressed in black, with a white neckcloth,
sent her a memoir of a child who died at the age of two years and eleven
months, after having fully indorsed all the doctrines of the particular
persuasion to which he not only belonged himself, but thought it very
shameful that everybody else did not belong.  What with foreboding looks
and dreary death-bed stories, it was a wonder the child made out to live
through it.  It saddened her early years, of course,--it distressed her
tender soul with thoughts which, as they cannot be fully taken in, should
be sparingly used as instruments of torture to break down the natural
cheerfulness of a healthy child, or, what is infinitely worse, to cheat a
dying one out of the kind illusions with which the Father of All has
strewed its downward path.

The child would have died, no doubt, and, if properly managed, might have
added another to the long catalogue of wasting children who have been as
cruelly played upon by spiritual physiologists, often with the best
intentions, as ever the subject of a rare disease by the curious students
of science.

Fortunately for her, however, a wise instinct had guided the late Latin
tutor in the selection of the partner of his life, and the future mother
of his child.  The deceased tutoress was a tranquil, smooth woman, easily
nourished, as such people are,--a quality which is inestimable in a
tutor's wife,--and so it happened that the daughter inherited enough
vitality from the mother to live through childhood and infancy and fight
her way towards womanhood, in spite of the tendencies she derived from
her other parent.

--Two and two do not always make four, in this matter of hereditary
descent of qualities.  Sometimes they make three, and sometimes five. It
seems as if the parental traits at one time showed separate, at another
blended,--that occasionally, the force of two natures is represented in
the derivative one by a diagonal of greater value than either original
line of living movement,--that sometimes there is a loss of vitality
hardly to be accounted for, and again a forward impulse of variable
intensity in some new and unforeseen direction.

So it was with this child.  She had glanced off from her parental
probabilities at an unexpected angle.  Instead of taking to classical
learning like her father, or sliding quietly into household duties like
her mother, she broke out early in efforts that pointed in the direction
of Art.  As soon as she could hold a pencil she began to sketch outlines
of objects round her with a certain air and spirit. Very extraordinary
horses, but their legs looked as if they could move.  Birds unknown to
Audubon, yet flying, as it were, with a rush. Men with impossible legs,
which did yet seem to have a vital connection with their most improbable
bodies.  By-and-by the doctor, on his beast,--an old man with a face
looking as if Time had kneaded it like dough with his knuckles, with a
rhubarb tint and flavor pervading himself and his sorrel horse and all
their appurtenances. A dreadful old man!  Be sure she did not forget
those saddle-bags that held the detestable bottles out of which he used
to shake those loathsome powders which, to virgin childish palates that
find heaven in strawberries and peaches, are--Well, I suppose I had
better stop. Only she wished she was dead sometimes when she heard him
coming. On the next leaf would figure the gentleman with the black coat
and white cravat, as he looked when he came and entertained her with
stories concerning the death of various little children about her age, to
encourage her, as that wicked Mr. Arouet said about shooting Admiral
Byng.   Then she would take her pencil, and with a few scratches there
would be the outline of a child, in which you might notice how one sudden
sweep gave the chubby cheek, and two dots darted at the paper looked like
real eyes.

By-and-by she went to school, and caricatured the schoolmaster on the
leaves of her grammars and geographies, and drew the faces of her
companions, and, from time to time, heads and figures from her fancy,
with large eyes, far apart, like those of Raffaelle's mothers and
children, sometimes with wild floating hair, and then with wings and
heads thrown back in ecstasy.  This was at about twelve years old, as the
dates of these drawings show, and, therefore, three or four years before
she came among us.  Soon after this time, the ideal figures began to take
the place of portraits and caricatures, and a new feature appeared in her
drawing-books in the form of fragments of verse and short poems.

It was dull work, of course, for such a young girl to live with an old
spinster and go to a village school.  Her books bore testimony to this;
for there was a look of sadness in the faces she drew, and a sense of
weariness and longing for some imaginary conditions of blessedness or
other, which began to be painful.  She might have gone through this
flowering of the soul, and, casting her petals, subsided into a sober,
human berry, but for the intervention of friendly assistance and counsel.

In the town where she lived was a lady of honorable condition, somewhat
past middle age, who was possessed of pretty ample means, of cultivated
tastes, of excellent principles, of exemplary character, and of more than
common accomplishments.  The gentleman in black broadcloth and white
neckerchief only echoed the common voice about her, when he called her,
after enjoying, beneath her hospitable roof, an excellent cup of tea,
with certain elegancies and luxuries he was unaccustomed to, "The Model
of all the Virtues."

She deserved this title as well as almost any woman.  She did really
bristle with moral excellences.  Mention any good thing she had not done;
I should like to see you try!  There was no handle of weakness to take
hold of her by; she was as unseizable, except in her totality, as a
billiard-ball; and on the broad, green, terrestrial table, where she had
been knocked about, like all of us, by the cue of Fortune, she glanced
from every human contact, and "caromed" from one relation to another, and
rebounded from the stuffed cushion of temptation, with such exact and
perfect angular movements, that the Enemy's corps of Reporters had long
given up taking notes of her conduct, as there was no chance for their
master.

What an admirable person for the patroness and directress of a slightly
self-willed child, with the lightning zigzag line of genius running like
a glittering vein through the marble whiteness of her virgin nature!  One
of the lady-patroness's peculiar virtues was calmness.  She was resolute
and strenuous, but still.  You could depend on her for every duty; she
was as true as steel.  She was kind-hearted and serviceable in all the
relations of life.  She had more sense, more knowledge, more
conversation, as well as more goodness, than all the partners you have
waltzed with this winter put together.

Yet no man was known to have loved her, or even to have offered himself
to her in marriage.  It was a great wonder.  I am very anxious to
vindicate my character as a philosopher and an observer of Nature by
accounting for this apparently extraordinary fact.

You may remember certain persons who have the misfortune of presenting to
the friends whom they meet a cold, damp hand.  There are states of mind
in which a contact of this kind has a depressing effect on the vital
powers that makes us insensible to all the virtues and graces of the
proprietor of one of these life-absorbing organs.  When they touch us,
virtue passes out of us, and we feel as if our electricity had been
drained by a powerful negative battery, carried about by an overgrown
human torpedo.

"The Model of all the Virtues" had a pair of searching eyes as clear as
Wenham ice; but they were slower to melt than that fickle jewelry. Her
features disordered themselves slightly at times in a surface-smile, but
never broke loose from their corners and indulged in the riotous tumult
of a laugh,--which, I take it, is the mob-law of the features;--and
propriety the magistrate who reads the riot-act.  She carried the
brimming cup of her inestimable virtues with a cautious, steady hand, and
an eye always on them, to see that they did not spill.  Then she was an
admirable judge of character.  Her mind was a perfect laboratory of tests
and reagents; every syllable you put into breath went into her
intellectual eudiometer, and all your thoughts were recorded on
litmus-paper.  I think there has rarely been a more admirable woman.
Of course, Miss Iris was immensely and passionately attached
to her.--Well,--these are two highly oxygenated adverbs,
--grateful,--suppose we say,--yes,--grateful, dutiful, obedient to her
wishes for the most part,--perhaps not quite up to the concert pitch of
such a perfect orchestra of the virtues.

We must have a weak spot or two in a character before we can love it
much.  People that do not laugh or cry, or take more of anything than is
good for them, or use anything but dictionary-words, are admirable
subjects for biographies.  But we don't always care most for those
flat-pattern flowers that press best in the herbarium.

This immaculate woman,--why could n't she have a fault or two? Is n't
there any old whisper which will tarnish that wearisome aureole of
saintly perfection?  Does n't she carry a lump of opium in her pocket?
Is n't her cologne-bottle replenished oftener than its legitimate use
would require?  It would be such a comfort!

Not for the world would a young creature like Iris have let such words
escape her, or such thoughts pass through her mind.  Whether at the
bottom of her soul lies any uneasy consciousness of an oppressive
presence, it is hard to say, until we know more about her.  Iris sits
between the Little Gentleman and the "Model of all the Virtues," as the
black-coated personage called her.--I will watch them all.

--Here I stop for the present.  What the Professor said has had to make
way this time for what he saw and heard.

-And now you may read these lines, which were written for gentle souls
who love music, and read in even tones, and, perhaps, with something like
a smile upon the reader's lips, at a meeting where these musical friends
had gathered.  Whether they were written with smiles or not, you can
guess better after you have read them.


                    THE OPENING OF THE PIANO.

     In the little southern parlor of the house you may have seen
     With the gambrel-roof, and the gable looking westward to the green,
     At the side toward the sunset, with the window on its right,
     Stood the London-made piano I am dreaming of to-night.

     Ah me! how I remember the evening when it came!
     What a cry of eager voices, what a group of cheeks in flame,
     When the wondrous boa was opened that had come from over seas,
     With its smell of mastic-varnish and its flash of ivory keys!

     Then the children all grew fretful in the restlessness of joy,
     For the boy would push his sister, and the sister crowd the boy,
     Till the father asked for quiet in his grave paternal way,
     But the mother hushed the tumult with the words, "Now, Mary, play."

     For the dear soul knew that music was a very sovereign balm;
     She had sprinkled it over Sorrow and seen its brow grow calm,
     In the days of slender harpsichords with tapping tinkling quills,
     Or caroling to her spinet with its thin metallic thrills.

     So Mary, the household minstrel, who always loved to please,
     Sat down to the new "Clementi," and struck the glittering keys.
     Hushed were the children's voices, and every eye grew dim,
     As, floating from lip and finger, arose the "Vesper Hymn."

     --Catharine, child of a neighbor, curly and rosy-red,
     (Wedded since, and a widow,--something like ten years dead,)
     Hearing a gush of music such as none before,
     Steals from her mother's chamber and peeps at the open door.

     Just as the "Jubilate" in threaded whisper dies,
     --"Open it! open it, lady!" the little maiden cries,
     (For she thought 't was a singing creature caged in a box she heard,)
     "Open it! open it, lady! and let me see the bird!"




IV

I don't know whether our literary or professional people are more amiable
than they are in other places, but certainly quarrelling is out of
fashion among them.  This could never be, if they were in the habit of
secret anonymous puffing of each other.  That is the kind of underground
machinery which manufactures false reputations and genuine hatreds.  On
the other hand, I should like to know if we are not at liberty to have a
good time together, and say the pleasantest things we can think of to
each other, when any of us reaches his thirtieth or fortieth or fiftieth
or eightieth birthday.

We don't have "scenes," I warrant you, on these occasions.  No "surprise"
parties!  You understand these, of course.  In the rural districts, where
scenic tragedy and melodrama cannot be had, as in the city, at the
expense of a quarter and a white pocket-handkerchief, emotional
excitement has to be sought in the dramas of real life.  Christenings,
weddings, and funerals, especially the latter, are the main dependence;
but babies, brides, and deceased citizens cannot be had at a day's
notice.  Now, then, for a surprise-party!

A bag of flour, a barrel of potatoes, some strings of onions, a basket of
apples, a big cake and many little cakes, a jug of lemonade, a purse
stuffed with bills of the more modest denominations, may, perhaps, do
well enough for the properties in one of these private theatrical
exhibitions.  The minister of the parish, a tender-hearted, quiet,
hard-working man, living on a small salary, with many children, sometimes
pinched to feed and clothe them, praying fervently every day to be blest
in his "basket and store," but sometimes fearing he asks amiss, to judge
by the small returns, has the first role,--not, however, by his own
choice, but forced upon him.  The minister's wife, a sharp-eyed,
unsentimental body, is first lady; the remaining parts by the rest of the
family.  If they only had a playbill, it would run thus:

                     ON TUESDAY NEXT
                    WILL BE PRESENTED
                   THE AFFECTING SCENE
                         CALLED

                   THE SURPRISE-PARTY

                           OR

                  THE OVERCOME FAMILY;

WITH THE FOLLOWING STRONG CAST OF CHARACTERS.

     The Rev.  Mr. Overcome, by the Clergyman of this Parish.
     Mrs.  Overcome, by his estimable lady.
     Masters Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John Overcome,
     Misses Dorcas, Tabitha, Rachel, and Hannah, Overcome, by their
     interesting children.
     Peggy, by the female help.

The poor man is really grateful;--it is a most welcome and unexpected
relief.  He tries to express his thanks,--his voice falters,--he
chokes,--and bursts into tears.  That is the great effect of the evening.
The sharp-sighted lady cries a little with one eye, and counts the
strings of onions, and the rest of the things, with the other.  The
children stand ready for a spring at the apples.  The female help weeps
after the noisy fashion of untutored handmaids.

Now this is all very well as charity, but do let the kind visitors
remember they get their money's worth.  If you pay a quarter for dry
crying, done by a second-rate actor, how much ought you to pay for real
hot, wet tears, out of the honest eyes of a gentleman who is not acting,
but sobbing in earnest?

All I meant to say, when I began, was, that this was not a surprise-party
where I read these few lines that follow:

     We will not speak of years to-night;
     For what have years to bring,
     But larger floods of love and light
     And sweeter songs to sing?

     We will not drown in wordy praise
     The kindly thoughts that rise;
     If friendship owns one tender phrase,
     He reads it in our eyes.

     We need not waste our schoolboy art
     To gild this notch of time;
     Forgive me, if my wayward heart
     Has throbbed in artless rhyme.

     Enough for him the silent grasp
     That knits us hand in hand,
     And he the bracelet's radiant clasp
     That locks our circling band.

     Strength to his hours of manly toil!
     Peace to his starlit dreams!
     Who loves alike the furrowed soil,
     The music-haunted streams!

     Sweet smiles to keep forever bright
     The sunshine on his lips,
     And faith, that sees the ring of light
     Round Nature's last eclipse!

--One of our boarders has been talking in such strong language that I am
almost afraid to report it.  However, as he seems to be really honest and
is so very sincere in his local prejudices, I don't believe anybody will
be very angry with him.

It is here, Sir! right here!--said the little deformed gentleman,--in
this old new city of Boston,--this remote provincial corner of a
provincial nation, that the Battle of the Standard is fighting, and was
fighting before we were born, and will be fighting when we are dead and
gone,--please God!  The battle goes on everywhere throughout
civilization; but here, here, here is the broad white flag flying which
proclaims, first of all, peace and good-will to men, and, next to that,
the absolute, unconditional spiritual liberty of each individual immortal
soul!  The three-hilled city against the seven-hilled city!  That is it,
Sir,--nothing less than that; and if you know what that means, I don't
think you'll ask for anything more.  I swear to you, Sir, I believe that
these two centres of civilization are just exactly the two points that
close the circuit in the battery of our planetary intelligence!  And I
believe there are spiritual eyes looking out from Uranus and unseen
Neptune,--ay, Sir, from the systems of Sirius and Arcturus and Aldebaran,
and as far as that faint stain of sprinkled worlds confluent in the
distance that we call the nebula of Orion,--looking on, Sir, with what
organs I know not, to see which are going to melt in that fiery fusion,
the accidents and hindrances of humanity or man himself, Sir,--the
stupendous abortion, the illustrious failure that he is, if the
three-hilled city does not ride down and trample out the seven-hilled
city!

--Steam 's up!--said the young man John, so called, in a low tone.
--Three hundred and sixty-five tons to the square inch.  Let him blow her
off, or he'll bu'st his b'iler.

The divinity-student took it calmly, only whispering that he thought
there was a little confusion of images between a galvanic battery and a
charge of cavalry.

But the Koh-i-noor--the gentleman, you remember, with a very large
diamond in his shirt-front laughed his scornful laugh, and made as if to
speak.

Sail in, Metropolis!--said that same young man John, by name.  And then,
in a lower lane, not meaning to be heard,--Now, then, Ma'am Allen!

But he was heard,--and the Koh-i-noor's face turned so white with rage,
that his blue-black moustache and beard looked fearful, seen against it.
He grinned with wrath, and caught at a tumbler, as if he would have
thrown it or its contents at the speaker.  The young Marylander fixed his
clear, steady eye upon him, and laid his hand on his arm, carelessly
almost, but the Jewel found it was held so that he could not move it.  It
was of no use.  The youth was his master in muscle, and in that deadly
Indian hug in which men wrestle with their eyes;--over in five seconds,
but breaks one of their two backs, and is good for threescore years and
ten;--one trial enough,--settles the whole matter,--just as when two
feathered songsters of the barnyard, game and dunghill, come
together,-after a jump or two at each other, and a few sharp kicks, there
is the end of it; and it is, Apres vous, Monsieur, with the beaten party
in all the social relations for all the rest of his days.

I cannot philosophically account for the Koh-i-noor's wrath.  For though
a cosmetic is sold, bearing the name of the lady to whom reference was
made by the young person John, yet, as it is publicly asserted in
respectable prints that this cosmetic is not a dye, I see no reason why
he should have felt offended by any suggestion that he was indebted to it
or its authoress.

I have no doubt that there are certain exceptional complexions to which
the purple tinge, above alluded to, is natural.  Nature is fertile in
variety.  I saw an albiness in London once, for sixpence, (including the
inspection of a stuffed boa-constrictor,) who looked as if she had been
boiled in milk.  A young Hottentot of my acquaintance had his hair all in
little pellets of the size of marrow-fat peas.  One of my own classmates
has undergone a singular change of late years,--his hair losing its
original tint, and getting a remarkable discolored look; and another has
ceased to cultivate any hair at all over the vertex or crown of the head.
So I am perfectly willing to believe that the purple-black of the
Koh-i-noor's moustache and whiskers is constitutional and not pigmentary.
But I can't think why he got so angry.

The intelligent reader will understand that all this pantomime of the
threatened onslaught and its suppression passed so quickly that it was
all over by the time the other end of the table found out there was a
disturbance; just as a man chopping wood half a mile off may be seen
resting on his axe at the instant you hear the last blow he struck.  So
you will please to observe that the Little Gentleman was not, interrupted
during the time implied by these ex-post-facto remarks of mine, but for
some ten or fifteen seconds only.

He did not seem to mind the interruption at all, for he started again.
The "Sir" of his harangue was no doubt addressed to myself more than
anybody else, but he often uses it in discourse as if he were talking
with some imaginary opponent.

--America, Sir,--he exclaimed,--is the only place where man is
full-grown!

He straightened himself up, as he spoke, standing on the top round of his
high chair, I suppose, and so presented the larger part of his little
figure to the view of the boarders.

It was next to impossible to keep from laughing.  The commentary was so
strange an illustration of the text!  I thought it was time to put in a
word; for I have lived in foreign parts, and am more or less
cosmopolitan.

I doubt if we have more practical freedom in America than they have in
England,---I said.--An Englishman thinks as he likes in religion and
politics.  Mr. Martineau speculates as freely as ever Dr. Channing did,
and Mr. Bright is as independent as Mr. Seward.

Sir,--said he,--it is n't what a man thinks or says; but when and where
and to whom he thinks and says it.  A man with a flint and steel striking
sparks over a wet blanket is one thing, and striking them over a
tinder-box is another.  The free Englishman is born under protest; he
lives and dies under protest,--a tolerated, but not a welcome fact.  Is
not freethinker a term of reproach in England?  The same idea in the soul
of an Englishman who struggled up to it and still holds it
antagonistically, and in the soul of an American to whom it is congenital
and spontaneous, and often unrecognized, except as an element blended
with all his thoughts, a natural movement, like the drawing of his breath
or the beating of his heart, is a very different thing.  You may teach a
quadruped to walk on his hind legs, but he is always wanting to be on all
fours.  Nothing that can be taught a growing youth is like the
atmospheric knowledge he breathes from his infancy upwards.  The American
baby sucks in freedom with the milk of the breast at which he hangs.

--That's a good joke,--said the young fellow John,--considerin' it
commonly belongs to a female Paddy.

I thought--I will not be certain--that the Little Gentleman winked, as if
he had been hit somewhere--as I have no doubt Dr. Darwin did when the
wooden-spoon suggestion upset his theory about why, etc.  If he winked,
however, he did not dodge.

A lively comment!--he said.--But Rome, in her great founder, sucked the
blood of empire out of the dugs of a brute, Sir!  The Milesian wet-nurse
is only a convenient vessel through which the American infant gets the
life-blood of this virgin soil, Sir, that is making man over again, on
the sunset pattern!  You don't think what we are doing and going to do
here.  Why, Sir, while commentators are bothering themselves with
interpretation of prophecies, we have got the new heavens and the new
earth over us and under us!  Was there ever anything in Italy, I should
like to know, like a Boston sunset?

--This time there was a laugh, and the little man himself almost smiled.

Yes,--Boston sunsets;--perhaps they're as good in some other places, but
I know 'em best here.  Anyhow, the American skies are different from
anything they see in the Old World.  Yes, and the rocks are different,
and the soil is different, and everything that comes out of the soil,
from grass up to Indians, is different.  And now that the provisional
races are dying out--

--What do you mean by the provisional races, Sir?--said the
divinity-student, interrupting him.

Why, the aboriginal bipeds, to be sure,--he answered,--the red-crayon
sketch of humanity laid on the canvas before the colors for the real
manhood were ready.

I hope they will come to something yet,--said the divinity-student.

Irreclaimable, Sir,--irreclaimable!--said the Little Gentleman.--Cheaper
to breed white men than domesticate a nation of red ones. When you can
get the bitter out of the partridge's thigh, you can make an enlightened
commonwealth of Indians.  A provisional race, Sir,--nothing more.
Exhaled carbonic acid for the use of vegetation, kept down the bears and
catamounts, enjoyed themselves in scalping and being scalped, and then
passed away or are passing away, according to the programme.

Well, Sir, these races dying out, the white man has to acclimate himself.
It takes him a good while; but he will come all right by-and-by, Sir,--as
sound as a woodchuck,--as sound as a musquash!

A new nursery, Sir, with Lake Superior and Huron and all the rest of 'em
for wash-basins!  A new race, and a whole new world for the new-born
human soul to work in!  And Boston is the brain of it, and has been any
time these hundred years!  That's all I claim for Boston,--that it is
the thinking centre of the continent, and therefore of the planet.

--And the grand emporium of modesty,--said the divinity-student, a little
mischievously.

Oh, don't talk to me of modesty!--answered the Little Gentleman,--I 'm
past that!  There is n't a thing that was ever said or done in Boston,
from pitching the tea overboard to the last ecclesiastical lie it tore
into tatters and flung into the dock, that was n't thought very
indelicate by some fool or tyrant or bigot, and all the entrails of
commercial and spiritual conservatism are twisted into colics as often as
this revolutionary brain of ours has a fit of thinking come over it.--No,
Sir,--show me any other place that is, or was since the megalosaurus has
died out, where wealth and social influence are so fairly divided between
the stationary and the progressive classes!  Show me any other place
where every other drawing-room is not a chamber of the Inquisition, with
papas and mammas for inquisitors,--and the cold shoulder, instead of the
"dry pan and the gradual fire," the punishment of "heresy"!

--We think Baltimore is a pretty civilized kind of a village,--said the
young Marylander, good-naturedly.--But I suppose you can't forgive it for
always keeping a little ahead of Boston in point of numbers,--tell the
truth now.  Are we not the centre of something?

Ah, indeed, to be sure you are.  You are the gastronomic metropolis of
the Union.  Why don't you put a canvas-back-duck on the top of the
Washington column?  Why don't you get that lady off from Battle Monument
and plant a terrapin in her place?  Why will you ask for other glories
when you have soft crabs?  No, Sir,--you live too well to think as hard
as we do in Boston.  Logic comes to us with the salt-fish of Cape Ann;
rhetoric is born of the beans of Beverly; but you--if you open your
mouths to speak, Nature stops them with a fat oyster, or offers a slice
of the breast of your divine bird, and silences all your aspirations.

And what of Philadelphia?--said the Marylander.

Oh, Philadelphia?--Waterworks,--killed by the Croton and Cochituate;
--Ben Franklin,--borrowed from Boston;--David Rittenhouse,--made an
orrery;--Benjamin Rush,--made a medical system;--both interesting to
antiquarians;--great Red-river raft of medical students,--spontaneous
generation of professors to match;--more widely known through the
Moyamensing hose-company, and the Wistar parties;-for geological section
of social strata, go to The Club.--Good place to live in,--first-rate
market,--tip-top peaches.--What do we know about Philadelphia, except
that the engine-companies are always shooting each other?

And what do you say to New York?--asked the Koh-i-noor.

A great city, Sir,--replied the Little Gentleman,--a very opulent,
splendid city.  A point of transit of much that is remarkable, and of
permanence for much that is respectable.  A great money-centre.  San
Francisco with the mines above-ground,--and some of 'em under the
sidewalks.  I have seen next to nothing grandiose, out of New York, in
all our cities.  It makes 'em all look paltry and petty.  Has many
elements of civilization.  May stop where Venice did, though, for aught
we know.--The order of its development is just this:--Wealth;
architecture; upholstery; painting; sculpture.  Printing, as a mechanical
art,--just as Nicholas Jepson and the Aldi, who were scholars too, made
Venice renowned for it.  Journalism, which is the accident of business
and crowded populations, in great perfection. Venice got as far as Titian
and Paul Veronese and Tintoretto,--great colorists, mark you, magnificent
on the flesh-and-blood side of Art,--but look over to Florence and see
who lie in Santa Crocea, and ask out of whose loins Dante sprung!

Oh, yes, to be sure, Venice built her Ducal Palace, and her Church of St.
Mark, and her Casa d' Or, and the rest of her golden houses; and Venice
had great pictures and good music; and Venice had a Golden Book, in which
all the large tax-payers had their names written;--but all that did not
make Venice the brain of Italy.

I tell you what, Sir,--with all these magnificent appliances of
civilization, it is time we began to hear something from the djinnis
donee whose names are on the Golden Book of our sumptuous, splendid,
marble-placed Venice,--something in the higher walks of literature,
--something in the councils of the nation.  Plenty of Art, I grant you,
Sir; now, then, for vast libraries, and for mighty scholars and thinkers
and statesmen,--five for every Boston one, as the population is to
ours,--ten to one more properly, in virtue of centralizing attraction as
the alleged metropolis, and not call our people provincials, and have to
come begging to us to write the lives of Hendrik Hudson and Gouverneur
Morris!

--The Little Gentleman was on his hobby, exalting his own city at the
expense of every other place.  I have my doubts if he had been in either
of the cities he had been talking about.  I was just going to say
something to sober him down, if I could, when the young Marylander spoke
up.

Come, now,--he said,--what's the use of these comparisons?  Did n't I
hear this gentleman saying, the other day, that every American owns all
America?  If you have really got more brains in Boston than other folks,
as you seem to think, who hates you for it, except a pack of scribbling
fools?  If I like Broadway better than Washington Street, what then?  I
own them both, as much as anybody owns either. I am an American,--and
wherever I look up and see the stars and stripes overhead, that is home
to me!

He spoke, and looked up as if he heard the emblazoned folds crackling
over him in the breeze.  We all looked up involuntarily, as if we should
see the national flag by so doing.  The sight of the dingy ceiling and
the gas-fixture depending therefrom dispelled the illusion.

Bravo! bravo!--said the venerable gentleman on the other side of the
table.--Those are the sentiments of Washington's Farewell Address.
Nothing better than that since the last chapter in Revelations.
Five-and-forty years ago there used to be Washington societies, and
little boys used to walk in processions, each little boy having a copy of
the Address, bound in red, hung round his neck by a ribbon. Why don't
they now?  Why don't they now?  I saw enough of hating each other in the
old Federal times; now let's love each other, I say,--let's love each
other, and not try to make it out that there is n't any place fit to live
in except the one we happen to be born in.

It dwarfs the mind, I think,--said I,--to feed it on any localism. The
full stature of manhood is shrivelled--

The color burst up into my cheeks.  What was I saying,--I, who would not
for the world have pained our unfortunate little boarder by an allusion?

I will go,--he said,--and made a movement with his left arm to let
himself down from his high chair.

No,--no,--he does n't mean it,--you must not go,--said a kind voice next
him; and a soft, white hand was laid upon his arm.

Iris, my dear!--exclaimed another voice, as of a female, in accents that
might be considered a strong atmospheric solution of duty with very
little flavor of grace.

She did not move for this address, and there was a tableau that lasted
some seconds.  For the young girl, in the glory of half-blown womanhood,
and the dwarf, the cripple, the misshapen little creature covered with
Nature's insults, looked straight into each other's eyes.

Perhaps no handsome young woman had ever looked at him so in his life.
Certainly the young girl never had looked into eyes that reached into her
soul as these did.  It was not that they were in themselves
supernaturally bright,--but there was the sad fire in them that flames up
from the soul of one who looks on the beauty of woman without hope, but,
alas! not without emotion.  To him it seemed as if those amber gates had
been translucent as the brown water of a mountain brook, and through them
he had seen dimly into a virgin wilderness, only waiting for the sunrise
of a great passion for all its buds to blow and all its bowers to ring
with melody.

That is my image, of course,--not his.  It was not a simile that was in
his mind, or is in anybody's at such a moment,--it was a pang of wordless
passion, and then a silent, inward moan.

A lady's wish,--he said, with a certain gallantry of manner,--makes
slaves of us all.--And Nature, who is kind to all her children, and never
leaves the smallest and saddest of all her human failures without one
little comfit of self-love at the bottom of his poor ragged
pocket,--Nature suggested to him that he had turned his sentence well;
and he fell into a reverie, in which the old thoughts that were always
hovering dust outside the doors guarded by Common Sense, and watching for
a chance to squeeze in, knowing perfectly well they would be
ignominiously kicked out again as soon as Common Sense saw them, flocked
in pell-mell,--misty, fragmentary, vague, half-ashamed of themselves, but
still shouldering up against his inner consciousness till it warmed with
their contact:--John Wilkes's--the ugliest man's in England--saying, that
with half-an-hour's start he would cut out the handsomest man in all the
land in any woman's good graces; Cadenus--old and savage--leading captive
Stella and Vanessa; and then the stray line of a ballad, "And a winning
tongue had he,"--as much as to say, it is n't looks, after all, but
cunning words, that win our Eves over,--just as of old when it was the
worst-looking brute of the lot that got our grandmother to listen to his
stuff and so did the mischief.

Ah, dear me!  We rehearse the part of Hercules with his club, subjugating
man and woman in our fancy, the first by the weight of it, and the second
by our handling of it,--we rehearse it, I say, by our own hearth-stones,
with the cold poker as our club, and the exercise is easy.  But when we
come to real life, the poker is in the fore, and, ten to one, if we would
grasp it, we find it too hot to hold;--lucky for us, if it is not
white-hot, and we do not have to leave the skin of our hands sticking to
it when we fling it down or drop it with a loud or silent cry!

--I am frightened when I find into what a labyrinth of human character
and feeling I am winding.  I meant to tell my thoughts, and to throw in a
few studies of manner and costume as they pictured themselves for me from
day to day.  Chance has thrown together at the table with me a number of
persons who are worth studying, and I mean not only to look on them, but,
if I can, through them.  You can get any man's or woman's secret, whose
sphere is circumscribed by your own, if you will only look patiently on
them long enough.  Nature is always applying her reagents to character,
if you will take the pains to watch her.  Our studies of character, to
change the image, are very much like the surveyor's triangulation of a
geographical province.  We get a base-line in organization, always; then
we get an angle by sighting some distant object to which the passions or
aspirations of the subject of our observation are tending; then
another;--and so we construct our first triangle.  Once fix a man's
ideals, and for the most part the rest is easy.  A wants to die worth
half a million.  Good.  B (female) wants to catch him,--and outlive him.
All right.  Minor details at our leisure.

What is it, of all your experiences, of all your thoughts, of all your
misdoings, that lies at the very bottom of the great heap of acts of
consciousness which make up your past life?  What should you most dislike
to tell your nearest friend?--Be so good as to pause for a brief space,
and shut the volume you hold with your finger between the pages.--Oh,
that is it!

What a confessional I have been sitting at, with the inward ear of my
soul open, as the multitudinous whisper of my involuntary confidants came
back to me like the reduplicated echo of a cry among the craggy bills!

At the house of a friend where I once passed the night was one of those
stately upright cabinet desks and cases of drawers which were not rare in
prosperous families during the last century.  It had held the clothes and
the books and the papers of generation after generation.  The hands that
opened its drawers had grown withered, shrivelled, and at last been
folded in death.  The children that played with the lower handles had got
tall enough to open the desk, to reach the upper shelves behind the
folding-doors,--grown bent after a while,--and then followed those who
had gone before, and left the old cabinet to be ransacked by a new
generation.

A boy of ten or twelve was looking at it a few years ago, and, being a
quick-witted fellow, saw that all the space was not accounted for by the
smaller drawers in the part beneath the lid of the desk. Prying about
with busy eyes and fingers, he at length came upon a spring, on pressing
which, a secret drawer flew from its hiding-place.  It had never been
opened but by the maker.  The mahogany shavings and dust were lying in it
as when the artisan closed it,--and when I saw it, it was as fresh as if
that day finished.

Is there not one little drawer in your soul, my sweet reader, which no
hand but yours has ever opened, and which none that have known you seem
to have suspected?  What does it hold?--A sin?--I hope not. What a
strange thing an old dead sin laid away in a secret drawer of the soul
is!  Must it some time or other be moistened with tears, until it comes
to life again and begins to stir in our consciousness,--as the dry
wheel-animalcule, looking like a grain of dust, becomes alive, if it is
wet with a drop of water?

Or is it a passion?  There are plenty of withered men and women walking
about the streets who have the secret drawer in their hearts, which, if
it were opened, would show as fresh as it was when they were in the flush
of youth and its first trembling emotions.

What it held will, perhaps, never be known, until they are dead and gone,
and same curious eye lights on an old yellow letter with the fossil
footprints of the extinct passion trodden thick all over it.

There is not a boarder at our table, I firmly believe, excepting the
young girl, who has not a story of the heart to tell, if one could only
get the secret drawer open.  Even this arid female, whose armor of black
bombazine looks stronger against the shafts of love than any cuirass of
triple brass, has had her sentimental history, if I am not mistaken.  I
will tell you my reason for suspecting it.

Like many other old women, she shows a great nervousness and restlessness
whenever I venture to express any opinion upon a class of subjects which
can hardly be said to belong to any man or set of men as their strictly
private property,--not even to the clergy, or the newspapers commonly
called "religious."  Now, although it would be a great luxury to me to
obtain my opinions by contract, ready-made, from a professional man, and
although I have a constitutional kindly feeling to all sorts of good
people which would make me happy to agree with all their beliefs, if that
were possible, still I must have an idea, now and then, as to the meaning
of life; and though the only condition of peace in this world is to have
no ideas, or, at least, not to express them, with reference to such
subjects, I can't afford to pay quite so much as that even for peace.

I find that there is a very prevalent opinion among the dwellers on the
shores of Sir Isaac Newton's Ocean of Truth, that salt, fish, which have
been taken from it a good while ago, split open, cured and dried, are the
only proper and allowable food for reasonable people. I maintain, on the
other hand, that there are a number of live fish still swimming in it,
and that every one of us has a right to see if he cannot catch some of
them.  Sometimes I please myself with the idea that I have landed an
actual living fish, small, perhaps, but with rosy gills and silvery
scales.  Then I find the consumers of nothing but the salted and dried
article insist that it is poisonous, simply because it is alive, and cry
out to people not to touch it.  I have not found, however, that people
mind them much.

The poor boarder in bombazine is my dynamometer.  I try every
questionable proposition on her.  If she winces, I must be prepared for
an outcry from the other old women.  I frightened her, the other day, by
saying that faith, as an intellectual state, was self-reliance, which, if
you have a metaphysical turn, you will find is not so much of a paradox
as it sounds at first.  So she sent me a book to read which was to cure
me of that error.  It was an old book, and looked as if it had not been
opened for a long time.  What should drop out of it, one day, but a small
heart-shaped paper, containing a lock of that straight, coarse, brown
hair which sets off the sharp faces of so many thin-flanked, large-handed
bumpkins!  I read upon the paper the name "Hiram."--Love! love!
love!--everywhere! everywhere!--under diamonds and housemaids'
"jewelry,"--lifting the marrowy camel's-hair, and rustling even the black
bombazine!--No, no,--I think she never was pretty, but she was young
once, and wore bright ginghams, and, perhaps, gay merinos.  We shall find
that the poor little crooked man has been in love, or is in love, or will
be in love before we have done with him, for aught that I know!

Romance!  Was there ever a boarding-house in the world where the
seemingly prosaic table had not a living fresco for its background, where
you could see, if you had eyes, the smoke and fire of some upheaving
sentiment, or the dreary craters of smouldering or burnt-out passions?
You look on the black bombazine and high-necked decorum of your neighbor,
and no more think of the real life that underlies this despoiled and
dismantled womanhood than you think of a stone trilobite as having once
been full of the juices and the nervous thrills of throbbing and
self-conscious being.  There is a wild creature under that long yellow
pin which serves as brooch for the bombazine cuirass,--a wild creature,
which I venture to say would leap in his cage, if I should stir him,
quiet as you think him.  A heart which has been domesticated by matrimony
and maternity is as tranquil as a tame bullfinch; but a wild heart which
has never been fairly broken in flutters fiercely long after you think
time has tamed it down,--like that purple finch I had the other day,
which could not be approached without such palpitations and frantic
flings against the bars of his cage, that I had to send him back and get
a little orthodox canary which had learned to be quiet and never mind the
wires or his keeper's handling.  I will tell you my wicked, but half
involuntary experiment on the wild heart under the faded bombazine.

Was there ever a person in the room with you, marked by any special
weakness or peculiarity, with whom you could be two hours and not touch
the infirm spot?  I confess the most frightful tendency to do just this
thing.  If a man has a brogue, I am sure to catch myself imitating it.
If another is lame, I follow him, or, worse than that, go before him,
limping.

I could never meet an Irish gentleman--if it had been the Duke of
Wellington himself--without stumbling upon the word "Paddy,"--which I use
rarely in my common talk.

I have been worried to know whether this was owing to some innate
depravity of disposition on my part, some malignant torturing instinct,
which, under different circumstances, might have made a Fijian
anthropophagus of me, or to some law of thought for which I was not
answerable.  It is, I am convinced, a kind of physical fact like
endosmosis, with which some of you are acquainted.  A thin film of
politeness separates the unspoken and unspeakable current of thought from
the stream of conversation.  After a time one begins to soak through and
mingle with the other.

We were talking about names, one day.--Was there ever anything,--I
said,--like the Yankee for inventing the most uncouth, pretentious,
detestable appellations,--inventing or finding them,--since the time of
Praise-God Barebones?  I heard a country-boy once talking of another whom
he called Elpit, as I understood him.  Elbridge is common enough, but
this sounded oddly.  It seems the boy was christened Lord Pitt,--and
called for convenience, as above.  I have heard a charming little girl,
belonging to an intelligent family in the country, called Anges
invariably; doubtless intended for Agnes. Names are cheap.  How can a man
name an innocent new-born child, that never did him any harm, Hiram?--The
poor relation, or whatever she is, in bombazine, turned toward me, but I
was stupid, and went on.--To think of a man going through life saddled
with such an abominable name as that!--The poor relation grew very
uneasy.--I continued; for I never thought of all this till afterwards.--I
knew one young fellow, a good many years ago, by the name of
Hiram--What's got into you, Cousin,--said our landlady,--to look
so?--There! you 've upset your teacup!

It suddenly occurred to me what I had been doing, and I saw the poor
woman had her hand at her throat; she was half-choking with the "hysteric
ball,"--a very odd symptom, as you know, which nervous women often
complain of.  What business had I to be trying experiments on this
forlorn old soul?  I had a great deal better be watching that young girl.

Ah, the young girl!  I am sure that she can hide nothing from me. Her
skin is so transparent that one can almost count her heart-beats by the
flushes they send into her cheeks.  She does not seem to be shy, either.
I think she does not know enough of danger to be timid. She seems to me
like one of those birds that travellers tell of, found in remote,
uninhabited islands, who, having never received any wrong at the hand of
man, show no alarm at and hardly any particular consciousness of his
presence.

The first thing will be to see how she and our little deformed gentleman
get along together; for, as I have told you, they sit side by side.  The
next thing will be to keep an eye on the duenna,--the "Model" and so
forth, as the white-neck-cloth called her.  The intention of that
estimable lady is, I understand, to launch her and leave her.  I suppose
there is no help for it, and I don't doubt this young lady knows how to
take care of herself, but I do not like to see young girls turned loose
in boarding-houses.  Look here now! There is that jewel of his race, whom
I have called for convenience the Koh-i-noor, (you understand it is quite
out of the question for me to use the family names of our boarders,
unless I want to get into trouble,)--I say, the gentleman with the
diamond is looking very often and very intently, it seems to me, down
toward the farther corner of the table, where sits our amber-eyed blonde.
The landlady's daughter does not look pleased, it seems to me, at this,
nor at those other attentions which the gentleman referred to has, as I
have learned, pressed upon the newly-arrived young person.  The landlady
made a communication to me, within a few days after the arrival of Miss
Iris, which I will repeat to the best of my remembrance.

He, (the person I have been speaking of,)--she said,--seemed to be kinder
hankerin' round after that young woman.  It had hurt her daughter's
feelin's a good deal, that the gentleman she was a-keepin' company with
should be offerin' tickets and tryin' to send presents to them that he'd
never know'd till jest a little spell ago,--and he as good as merried, so
fur as solemn promises went, to as respectable a young lady, if she did
say so, as any there was round, whosomever they might be.

Tickets! presents!--said I.--What tickets, what presents has he had the
impertinence to be offering to that young lady?

Tickets to the Museum,--said the landlady.  There is them that's glad
enough to go to the Museum, when tickets is given 'em; but some of 'em
ha'n't had a ticket sence Cenderilla was played,--and now he must be
offerin' 'em to this ridiculous young paintress, or whatever she is,
that's come to make more mischief than her board's worth.  But it a'n't
her fault,--said the landlady, relenting;--and that aunt of hers, or
whatever she is, served him right enough.

Why, what did she do?

Do?  Why, she took it up in the tongs and dropped it out o' winder.

Dropped? dropped what?--I said.

Why, the soap,--said the landlady.

It appeared that the Koh-i-noor, to ingratiate himself, had sent an
elegant package of perfumed soap, directed to Miss Iris, as a delicate
expression of a lively sentiment of admiration, and that, after having
met with the unfortunate treatment referred to, it was picked up by
Master Benjamin Franklin, who appropriated it, rejoicing, and indulged in
most unheard-of and inordinate ablutions in consequence, so that his
hands were a frequent subject of maternal congratulation, and he smelt
like a civet-cat for weeks after his great acquisition.

After watching daily for a time, I think I can see clearly into the
relation which is growing up between the little gentleman and the young
lady.  She shows a tenderness to him that I can't help being interested
in.  If he was her crippled child, instead of being more than old enough
to be her father, she could not treat him more kindly.  The landlady's
daughter said, the other day, she believed that girl was settin' her cap
for the Little Gentleman.

Some of them young folks is very artful,--said her mother,--and there is
them that would merry Lazarus, if he'd only picked up crumbs enough.  I
don't think, though, this is one of that sort; she's kinder
childlike,--said the landlady,--and maybe never had any dolls to play
with; for they say her folks was poor before Ma'am undertook to see to
her teachin' and board her and clothe her.

I could not help overhearing this conversation.  "Board her and clothe
her!"--speaking of such a young creature!  Oh, dear!--Yes,--she must be
fed,--just like Bridget, maid-of-all-work at this establishment.
Somebody must pay for it.  Somebody has a right to watch her and see how
much it takes to "keep" her, and growl at her, if she has too good an
appetite.  Somebody has a right to keep an eye on her and take care that
she does not dress too prettily.  No mother to see her own youth over
again in these fresh features and rising reliefs of half-sculptured
womanhood, and, seeing its loveliness, forget her lessons of
neutral-tinted propriety, and open the cases that hold her own ornaments
to find for her a necklace or a bracelet or a pair of ear-rings,--those
golden lamps that light up the deep, shadowy dimples on the cheeks of
young beauties,--swinging in a semi-barbaric splendor that carries the
wild fancy to Abyssinian queens and musky Odalisques!  I don't believe
any woman has utterly given up the great firm of Mundus & Co., so long as
she wears ear-rings.

I think Iris loves to hear the Little Gentleman talk.  She smiles
sometimes at his vehement statements, but never laughs at him.  When he
speaks to her, she keeps her eye always steadily upon him.  This may be
only natural good-breeding, so to speak, but it is worth noticing.  I
have often observed that vulgar persons, and public audiences of inferior
collective intelligence, have this in common: the least thing draws off
their minds, when you are speaking to them. I love this young creature's
rapt attention to her diminutive neighbor while he is speaking.

He is evidently pleased with it.  For a day or two after she came, he was
silent and seemed nervous and excited.  Now he is fond of getting the
talk into his own hands, and is obviously conscious that he has at least
one interested listener.  Once or twice I have seen marks of special
attention to personal adornment, a ruffled shirt-bosom, one day, and a
diamond pin in it,--not so very large as the Koh-i-noor's, but more
lustrous.  I mentioned the death's-head ring he wears on his right hand.
I was attracted by a very handsome red stone, a ruby or carbuncle or
something of the sort, to notice his left hand, the other day.  It is a
handsome hand, and confirms my suspicion that the cast mentioned was
taken from his arm.  After all, this is just what I should expect.  It is
not very uncommon to see the upper limbs, or one of them, running away
with the whole strength, and, therefore, with the whole beauty, which we
should never have noticed, if it had been divided equally between all
four extremities.  If it is so, of course he is proud of his one strong
and beautiful arm; that is human nature.  I am afraid he can hardly help
betraying his favoritism, as people who have any one showy point are apt
to do,--especially dentists with handsome teeth, who always smile back to
their last molars.

Sitting, as he does, next to the young girl, and next but one to the calm
lady who has her in charge, he cannot help seeing their relations to each
other.

That is an admirable woman, Sir,--he said to me one day, as we sat alone
at the table after breakfast,--an admirable woman, Sir,--and I hate her.

Of course, I begged an explanation.

An admirable woman, Sir, because she does good things, and even kind
things,--takes care of this--this--young lady--we have here, talks like a
sensible person, and always looks as if she was doing her duty with all
her might.  I hate her because her voice sounds as if it never trembled
and her eyes look as if she never knew what it was to cry.  Besides, she
looks at me, Sir, stares at me, as if she wanted to get an image of me
for some gallery in her brain,--and we don't love to be looked at in this
way, we that have--I hate her,--I hate her,--her eyes kill me,--it is
like being stabbed with icicles to be looked at so,--the sooner she goes
home, the better.  I don't want a woman to weigh me in a balance; there
are men enough for that sort of work.  The judicial character is n't
captivating in females, Sir.  A woman fascinates a man quite as often by
what she overlooks as by what she sees.  Love prefers twilight to
daylight; and a man doesn't think much of, nor care much for, a woman
outside of his household, unless he can couple the idea of love, past,
present, or future, with her.  I don't believe the Devil would give half
as much for the services of a sinner as he would for those of one of
these folks that are always doing virtuous acts in a way to make them
unpleasing.--That young girl wants a tender nature to cherish her and
give her a chance to put out her leaves,--sunshine, and not east winds.

He was silent,--and sat looking at his handsome left hand with the red
stone ring upon it.--Is he going to fall in love with Iris?

Here are some lines I read to the boarders the other day:--

           THE CROOKED FOOTPATH

     Ah, here it is! the sliding rail
     That marks the old remembered spot,
     --The gap that struck our schoolboy trail,
     --The crooked path across the lot.

     It left the road by school and church,
     A pencilled shadow, nothing more,
     That parted from the silver birch
     And ended at the farmhouse door.

     No line or compass traced its plan;
     With frequent bends to left or right,
     In aimless, wayward curves it ran,
     But always kept the door in sight.

     The gabled porch, with woodbine green,
     --The broken millstone at the sill,
     --Though many a rood might stretch between,
     The truant child could see them still.

     No rocks, across the pathway lie,
     --No fallen trunk is o'er it thrown,
     --And yet it winds, we know not why,
     And turns as if for tree or stone.

     Perhaps some lover trod the way
     With shaking knees and leaping heart,
     --And so it often runs astray
     With sinuous sweep or sudden start.

     Or one, perchance, with clouded brain
     From some unholy banquet reeled,
     --And since, our devious steps maintain
     His track across the trodden field.

     Nay, deem not thus,--no earthborn will
     Could ever trace a faultless line;
     Our truest steps are human still,
     --To walk unswerving were divine!

     Truants from love, we dream of wrath;
     --Oh, rather let us trust the more!
     Through all the wanderings of the path,
     We still can see our Father's door!




V

The Professor finds a Fly in his Teacup.

I have a long theological talk to relate, which must be dull reading to
some of my young and vivacious friends.  I don't know, however, that any
of them have entered into a contract to read all that I write, or that I
have promised always to write to please them.  What if I should sometimes
write to please myself?

Now you must know that there are a great many things which interest me,
to some of which this or that particular class of readers may be totally
indifferent.  I love Nature, and human nature, its thoughts, affections,
dreams, aspirations, delusions,--Art in all its forms,--virtu in all its
eccentricities,--old stories from black-letter volumes and yellow
manuscripts, and new projects out of hot brains not yet imbedded in the
snows of age.  I love the generous impulses of the reformer; but not less
does my imagination feed itself upon the old litanies, so often warmed by
the human breath upon which they were wafted to Heaven that they glow
through our frames like our own heart's blood.  I hope I love good men
and women; I know that they never speak a word to me, even if it be of
question or blame, that I do not take pleasantly, if it is expressed with
a reasonable amount of human kindness.

I have before me at this time a beautiful and affecting letter, which I
have hesitated to answer, though the postmark upon it gave its direction,
and the name is one which is known to all, in some of its
representatives.  It contains no reproach, only a delicately-hinted fear.
Speak gently, as this dear lady has spoken, and there is no heart so
insensible that it does not answer to the appeal, no intellect so virile
that it does not own a certain deference to the claims of age, of
childhood, of sensitive and timid natures, when they plead with it not to
look at those sacred things by the broad daylight which they see in
mystic shadow.  How grateful would it be to make perpetual peace with
these pleading saints and their confessors, by the simple act that
silences all complainings!  Sleep, sleep, sleep! says the
Arch-Enchantress of them all,--and pours her dark and potent anodyne,
distilled over the fires that consumed her foes,--its large, round drops
changing, as we look, into the beads of her convert's rosary!  Silence!
the pride of reason! cries another, whose whole life is spent in
reasoning down reason.

I hope I love good people, not for their sake, but for my own.  And most
assuredly, if any deed of wrong or word of bitterness led me into an act
of disrespect towards that enlightened and excellent class of men who
make it their calling to teach goodness and their duty to practise it, I
should feel that I had done myself an injury rather than them.  Go and
talk with any professional man holding any of the medieval creeds,
choosing one who wears upon his features the mark of inward and outward
health, who looks cheerful, intelligent, and kindly, and see how all your
prejudices melt away in his presence!  It is impossible to come into
intimate relations with a large, sweet nature, such as you may often find
in this class, without longing to be at one with it in all its modes of
being and believing.  But does it not occur to you that one may love
truth as he sees it, and his race as he views it, better than even the
sympathy and approbation of many good men whom he honors,--better than
sleeping to the sound of the Miserere or listening to the repetition of
an effete Confession of Faith?

The three learned professions have but recently emerged from a state of
quasi-barbarism.  None of them like too well to be told of it, but it
must be sounded in their ears whenever they put on airs.  When a man has
taken an overdose of laudanum, the doctors tell us to place him between
two persons who shall make him walk up and down incessantly; and if he
still cannot be kept from going to sleep, they say that a lash or two
over his back is of great assistance.

So we must keep the doctors awake by telling them that they have not yet
shaken off astrology and the doctrine of signatures, as is shown by the
form of their prescriptions, and their use of nitrate of silver, which
turns epileptics into Ethiopians.  If that is not enough, they must be
given over to the scourgers, who like their task and get good fees for
it.  A few score years ago, sick people were made to swallow burnt toads
and powdered earthworms and the expressed juice of wood-lice.  The
physician of Charles I. and II. prescribed abominations not to be named.
Barbarism, as bad as that of Congo or Ashantee.  Traces of this barbarism
linger even in the greatly improved medical science of our century.  So
while the solemn farce of over-drugging is going on, the world over, the
harlequin pseudo-science jumps on to the stage, whip in hand, with
half-a-dozen somersets, and begins laying about him.

In 1817, perhaps you remember, the law of wager by battle was unrepealed,
and the rascally murderous, and worse than murderous, clown, Abraham
Thornton, put on his gauntlet in open court and defied the appellant to
lift the other which he threw down.  It was not until the reign of George
II. that the statutes against witchcraft were repealed.  As for the
English Court of Chancery, we know that its antiquated abuses form one of
the staples of common proverbs and popular literature.  So the laws and
the lawyers have to be watched perpetually by public opinion as much as
the doctors do.

I don't think the other profession is an exception.  When the Reverend
Mr. Cauvin and his associates burned my distinguished scientific
brother,--he was burned with green fagots, which made it rather slow and
painful,--it appears to me they were in a state of religious barbarism.
The dogmas of such people about the Father of Mankind and his creatures
are of no more account in my opinion than those of a council of Aztecs.
If a man picks your pocket, do you not consider him thereby disqualified
to pronounce any authoritative opinion on matters of ethics?  If a man
hangs my ancient female relatives for sorcery, as they did in this
neighborhood a little while ago, or burns my instructor for not believing
as he does, I care no more for his religious edicts than I should for
those of any other barbarian.

Of course, a barbarian may hold many true opinions; but when the ideas of
the healing art, of the administration of justice, of Christian love,
could not exclude systematic poisoning, judicial duelling, and murder for
opinion's sake, I do not see how we can trust the verdict of that time
relating to any subject which involves the primal instincts violated in
these abominations and absurdities.--What if we are even now in a state
of semi-barbarism?

[This physician believes we "are even now in a state of semi-barbarism":
invasive procedures for the prolongation of death rather than
prolongation of life; "faith",as slimly based as medieval faith in minute
differences between control and treated groups; statistical manipulation
to prove a prejudice.  Medicine has a good deal to answer for!  D.W.]

Perhaps some think we ought not to talk at table about such things.--I
am not so sure of that.  Religion and government appear to me the two
subjects which of all others should belong to the common talk of people
who enjoy the blessings of freedom.  Think, one moment.  The earth is a
great factory-wheel, which, at every revolution on its axis, receives
fifty thousand raw souls and turns off nearly the same number worked up
more or less completely.  There must be somewhere a population of two
hundred thousand million, perhaps ten or a hundred times as many,
earth-born intelligences.  Life, as we call it, is nothing but the edge
of the boundless ocean of existence where it comes on soundings.  In this
view, I do not see anything so fit to talk about, or half so interesting,
as that which relates to the innumerable majority of our
fellow-creatures, the dead-living, who are hundreds of thousands to one
of the live-living, and with whom we all potentially belong, though we
have got tangled for the present in some parcels of fibrine, albumen, and
phosphates, that keep us on the minority side of the house.  In point of
fact, it is one of the many results of Spiritualism to make the permanent
destiny of the race a matter of common reflection and discourse, and a
vehicle for the prevailing disbelief of the Middle-Age doctrines on the
subject.  I cannot help thinking, when I remember how many conversations
my friend and myself have sported, that it would be very extraordinary,
if there were no mention of that class of subjects which involves all
that we have and all that we hope, not merely for ourselves, but for the
dear people whom we love best,--noble men, pure and lovely women,
ingenuous children, about the destiny of nine tenths of whom you know the
opinions that would have been taught by those old man-roasting,
woman-strangling dogmatists.--However, I fought this matter with one of
our boarders the other day, and I am going to report the conversation.

The divinity-student came down, one morning, looking rather more serious
than usual.  He said little at breakfast-time, but lingered after the
others, so that I, who am apt to be long at the table, found myself alone
with him.

When the rest were all gone, he turned his chair round towards mine, and
began.

I am afraid,--he said,--you express yourself a little too freely on a
most important class of subjects.  Is there not danger in introducing
discussions or allusions relating to matters of religion into common
discourse?

Danger to what?--I asked.

Danger to truth,--he replied, after a slight pause.

I didn't know Truth was such an invalid,' I said.--How long is it since
she could only take the air in a close carriage, with a gentleman in a
black coat on the box?  Let me tell you a story, adapted to young
persons, but which won't hurt older ones.

--There was a very little boy who had one of those balloons you may have
seen, which are filled with light gas, and are held by a string to keep
them from running off in aeronautic voyages on their own account.  This
little boy had a naughty brother, who said to him, one day,--Brother,
pull down your balloon, so that I can look at it and take hold of it.
Then the little boy pulled it down.  Now the naughty brother had a sharp
pin in his hand, and he thrust it into the balloon, and all the gas oozed
out, so that there was nothing left but a shrivelled skin.

One evening, the little boy's father called him to the window to see the
moon, which pleased him very much; but presently he said,--Father, do
not pull the string and bring down the moon, for my naughty brother will
prick it, and then it will all shrivel up and we shall not see it any
more.

Then his father laughed, and told him how the moon had been shining a
good while, and would shine a good while longer, and that all we could do
was to keep our windows clean, never letting the dust get too thick on
them, and especially to keep our eyes open, but that we could not pull
the moon down with a string, nor prick it with a pin.--Mind you this,
too, the moon is no man's private property, but is seen from a good many
parlor-windows.

--Truth is tough.  It will not break, like a bubble, at a touch; nay, you
may kick it about all day, like a football, and it will be round and full
at evening.  Does not Mr. Bryant say, that Truth gets well if she is run
over by a locomotive, while Error dies of lockjaw if she scratches her
finger?  [Would that this was so:--error, superstition, mysticism,
authoritarianism, pseudo-science all have a tenacity that survives
inexplicably.  D.W.]  I never heard that a mathematician was alarmed for
the safety of a demonstrated proposition.  I think, generally, that fear
of open discussion implies feebleness of inward conviction, and great
sensitiveness to the expression of individual opinion is a mark of
weakness.

--I am not so much afraid for truth,--said the divinity-student,--as for
the conceptions of truth in the minds of persons not accustomed to judge
wisely the opinions uttered before them.

Would you, then, banish all allusions to matters of this nature from the
society of people who come together habitually?

I would be very careful in introducing them,--said the divinity-student.

Yes, but friends of yours leave pamphlets in people's entries, to be
picked up by nervous misses and hysteric housemaids, full of doctrines
these people do not approve.  Some of your friends stop little children
in the street, and give them books, which their parents, who have had
them baptized into the Christian fold and give them what they consider
proper religious instruction, do not think fit for them.  One would say
it was fair enough to talk about matters thus forced upon people's
attention.

The divinity-student could not deny that this was what might be called
opening the subject to the discussion of intelligent people.

But,--he said,--the greatest objection is this, that persons who have not
made a professional study of theology are not competent to speak on such
subjects.  Suppose a minister were to undertake to express opinions on
medical subjects, for instance, would you not think he was going beyond
his province?

I laughed,--for I remembered John Wesley's "sulphur and supplication,"
and so many other cases where ministers had meddled with
medicine,--sometimes well and sometimes ill, but, as a general rule, with
a tremendous lurch to quackery, owing to their very loose way of
admitting evidence,--that I could not help being amused.

I beg your pardon,--I said,--I do not wish to be impolite, but I was
thinking of their certificates to patent medicines.  Let us look at this
matter.

If a minister had attended lectures on the theory and practice of
medicine, delivered by those who had studied it most deeply, for thirty
or forty years, at the rate of from fifty to one hundred a year,--if he
had been constantly reading and hearing read the most approved text-books
on the subject,--if he had seen medicine actually practised according to
different methods, daily, for the same length of time,--I should think,
that if a person of average understanding, he was entitled to express an
opinion on the subject of medicine, or else that his instructors were a
set of ignorant and incompetent charlatans.

If, before a medical practitioner would allow me to enjoy the full
privileges of the healing art, he expected me to affirm my belief in a
considerable number of medical doctrines, drugs, and formulae, I should
think that he thereby implied my right to discuss the same, and my
ability to do so, if I knew how to express myself in English.

Suppose, for instance, the Medical Society should refuse to give us an
opiate, or to set a broken limb, until we had signed our belief in a
certain number of propositions,--of which we will say this is the first:

I.  All men's teeth are naturally in a state of total decay or caries,
and, therefore, no man can bite until every one of them is extracted and
a new set is inserted according to the principles of dentistry adopted by
this Society.

I, for one, should want to discuss that before signing my name to it, and
I should say this:--Why, no, that is n't true.  There are a good many bad
teeth, we all know, but a great many more good ones.  You must n't trust
the dentists; they are all the time looking at the people who have bad
teeth, and such as are suffering from toothache. The idea that you must
pull out every one of every nice young man and young woman's natural
teeth!  Poh, poh!  Nobody believes that.  This tooth must be
straightened, that must be filled with gold, and this other perhaps
extracted, but it must be a very rare case, if they are all so bad as to
require extraction; and if they are, don't blame the poor soul for it!
Don't tell us, as some old dentists used to, that everybody not only
always has every tooth in his head good for nothing, but that he ought to
have his head cut off as a punishment for that misfortune!  No, I can't
sign Number One.  Give us Number Two.

II.  We hold that no man can be well who does not agree with our views of
the efficacy of calomel, and who does not take the doses of it prescribed
in our tables, as there directed.

To which I demur, questioning why it should be so, and get for answer the
two following:

III.  Every man who does not take our prepared calomel, as prescribed by
us in our Constitution and By-Laws, is and must be a mass of disease from
head to foot; it being self-evident that he is simultaneously affected
with Apoplexy, Arthritis, Ascites, Asphyxia, and Atrophy; with
Borborygmus, Bronchitis, and Bulimia; with Cachexia, Carcinoma, and
Cretinismus; and so on through the alphabet, to Xerophthahnia and Zona,
with all possible and incompatible diseases which are necessary to make
up a totally morbid state; and he will certainly die, if he does not take
freely of our prepared calomel, to be obtained only of one of our
authorized agents.

IV.  No man shall be allowed to take our prepared calomel who does not
give in his solemn adhesion to each and all of the above-named and the
following propositions (from ten to a hundred) and show his mouth to
certain of our apothecaries, who have not studied dentistry, to examine
whether all his teeth have been extracted and a new set inserted
according to our regulations.

Of course, the doctors have a right to say we sha'n't have any rhubarb,
if we don't sign their articles, and that, if, after signing them, we
express doubts (in public), about any of them, they will cut us off from
our jalap and squills,--but then to ask a fellow not to discuss the
propositions before he signs them is what I should call boiling it down a
little too strong!

If we understand them, why can't we discuss them?  If we can't understand
them, because we have n't taken a medical degree, what the Father of Lies
do they ask us to sign them for?

Just so with the graver profession.  Every now and then some of its
members seem to lose common sense and common humanity.  The laymen have
to keep setting the divines right constantly.  Science, for instance,--in
other words, knowledge,--is not the enemy of religion; for, if so, then
religion would mean ignorance: But it is often the antagonist of
school-divinity.

Everybody knows the story of early astronomy and the school-divines. Come
down a little later, Archbishop Usher, a very learned Protestant prelate,
tells us that the world was created on Sunday, the twenty-third of
October, four thousand and four years before the birth of Christ.
Deluge, December 7th, two thousand three hundred and forty-eight years B.
C.  Yes, and the earth stands on an elephant, and the elephant on a
tortoise.  One statement is as near the truth as the other.

Again, there is nothing so brutalizing to some natures as moral surgery.
I have often wondered that Hogarth did not add one more picture to his
four stages of Cruelty.  Those wretched fools, reverend divines and
others, who were strangling men and women for imaginary crimes a little
more than a century ago among us, were set right by a layman, and very
angry it made them to have him meddle.

The good people of Northampton had a very remarkable man for their
clergyman,--a man with a brain as nicely adjusted for certain mechanical
processes as Babbage's calculating machine.  The commentary of the laymen
on the preaching and practising of Jonathan Edwards was, that, after
twenty-three years of endurance, they turned him out by a vote of twenty
to one, and passed a resolve that he should never preach for them again.
A man's logical and analytical adjustments are of little consequence,
compared to his primary relations with Nature and truth: and people have
sense enough to find it out in the long ran; they know what "logic" is
worth.

In that miserable delusion referred to above, the reverend Aztecs and
Fijians argued rightly enough from their premises, no doubt, for many men
can do this.  But common sense and common humanity were unfortunately
left out from their premises, and a layman had to supply them.  A hundred
more years and many of the barbarisms still lingering among us will, of
course, have disappeared like witch-hanging.  But people are sensitive
now, as they were then.  You will see by this extract that the Rev.
Cotton Mather did not like intermeddling with his business very well.

"Let the Levites of the Lord keep close to their Instructions," he says,
"and God will smite thro' the loins of those that rise up against them.
I will report unto you a Thing which many Hundreds among us know to be
true.  The Godly Minister of a certain Town in Connecticut, when he had
occasion to be absent on a Lord's Day from his Flock, employ'd an honest
Neighbour of some small Talents for a Mechanick, to read a Sermon out of
some good Book unto 'em.  This Honest, whom they ever counted also a
Pious Man, had so much conceit of his Talents, that instead of Reading a
Sermon appointed, he to the Surprize of the People, fell to preaching one
of his own.  For his Text he took these Words, 'Despise not
Prophecyings'; and in his Preachment he betook himself to bewail the Envy
of the Clergy in the Land, in that they did not wish all the Lord's
People to be Prophets, and call forth Private Brethren publickly to
prophesie.  While he was thus in the midst of his Exercise, God smote him
with horrible Madness; he was taken ravingly distracted; the People were
forc'd with violent Hands to carry him home.  I will not mention his
Name: He was reputed a Pious Man."--This is one of Cotton Mather's
"Remarkable Judgments of God, on Several Sorts of Offenders,"--and the
next cases referred to are the Judgments on the "Abominable Sacrilege" of
not paying the Ministers' Salaries.

This sort of thing does n't do here and now, you see, my young friend!
We talk about our free institutions;--they are nothing but a coarse
outside machinery to secure the freedom of individual thought. The
President of the United States is only the engine driver of our
broad-gauge mail-train; and every honest, independent thinker has a seat
in the first-class cars behind him.

--There is something in what you say,--replied the divinity-student;
--and yet it seems to me there are places and times where disputed
doctrines of religion should not be introduced.  You would not attack a
church dogma--say Total Depravity--in a lyceum-lecture, for instance?

Certainly not; I should choose another place,--I answered.--But, mind
you, at this table I think it is very different.  I shall express my
ideas on any subject I like.  The laws of the lecture-room, to which my
friends and myself are always amenable, do not hold here.  I shall not
often give arguments, but frequently opinions,--I trust with courtesy and
propriety, but, at any rate, with such natural forms of expression as it
has pleased the Almighty to bestow upon me.

A man's opinions, look you, are generally of much more value than his
arguments.  These last are made by his brain, and perhaps he does not
believe the proposition they tend to prove,--as is often the case with
paid lawyers; but opinions are formed by our whole nature,--brain,
heart, instinct, brute life, everything all our experience has shaped for
us by contact with the whole circle of our being.

--There is one thing more,--said the divinity-student,--that I wished to
speak of; I mean that idea of yours, expressed some time since, of
depolarizing the text of sacred books in order to judge them fairly. May
I ask why you do not try the experiment yourself?

Certainly,--I replied,--if it gives you any pleasure to ask foolish
questions.  I think the ocean telegraph-wire ought to be laid and will be
laid, but I don't know that you have any right to ask me to go and lay
it.  But, for that matter, I have heard a good deal of Scripture
depolarized in and out of the pulpit.  I heard the Rev. Mr. F. once
depolarize the story of the Prodigal Son in Park-Street Church.  Many
years afterwards, I heard him repeat the same or a similar depolarized
version in Rome, New York.  I heard an admirable depolarization of the
story of the young man who "had great possessions" from the Rev.  Mr. H.
in another pulpit, and felt that I had never half understood it before.
All paraphrases are more or less perfect depolarizations.  But I tell you
this: the faith of our Christian community is not robust enough to bear
the turning of our most sacred language into its depolarized equivalents.
You have only to look back to Dr. Channing's famous Baltimore discourse
and remember the shrieks of blasphemy with which it was greeted, to
satisfy yourself on this point.  Time, time only, can gradually wean us
from our Epeolatry, or word-worship, by spiritualizing our ideas of the
thing signified.  Man is an idolater or symbol-worshipper by nature,
which, of course, is no fault of his; but sooner or later all his local
and temporary symbols must be ground to powder, like the golden
calf,--word-images as well as metal and wooden ones.  Rough work,
iconoclasm,--but the only way to get at truth.  It is, indeed, as that
quaint and rare old discourse, "A Summons for Sleepers," hath it, "no
doubt a thankless office, and a verie unthriftie occupation; veritas
odium parit, truth never goeth without a scratcht face; he that will be
busie with voe vobis, let him looke shortly for coram nobas."

The very aim and end of our institutions is just this: that we may think
what we like and say what we think.

--Think what we like!--said the divinity-student;--think what we like!
What! against all human and divine authority?

Against all human versions of its own or any other authority.  At our own
peril always, if we do not like the right,--but not at the risk of being
hanged and quartered for political heresy, or broiled on green fagots for
ecclesiastical treason!  Nay, we have got so far, that the very word
heresy has fallen into comparative disuse among us.

And now, my young friend, let-us shake hands and stop our discussion,
which we will not make a quarrel.  I trust you know, or will learn, a
great many things in your profession which we common scholars do not
know; but mark this: when the common people of New England stop talking
politics and theology, it will be because they have got an Emperor to
teach them the one, and a Pope to teach them the other!

That was the end of my long conference with the divinity-student. The
next morning we got talking a little on the same subject, very
good-naturedly, as people return to a matter they have talked out.

You must look to yourself,--said the divinity-student,--if your
democratic notions get into print.  You will be fired into from all
quarters.

If it were only a bullet, with the marksman's name on it!--I said.--I
can't stop to pick out the peep-shot of the anonymous scribblers.

Right, Sir! right!--said the Little Gentleman.  The scamps!  I know the
fellows.  They can't give fifty cents to one of the Antipodes, but they
must have it jingled along through everybody's palms all the way, till it
reaches him,--and forty cents of it gets spilt, like the water out of the
fire-buckets passed along a "lane" at a fire;--but when it comes to
anonymous defamation, putting lies into people's mouths, and then
advertising those people through the country as the authors of them,--oh,
then it is that they let not their left hand know what their right hand
doeth!

I don't like Ehud's style of doing business, Sir.  He comes along with a
very sanctimonious look, Sir, with his "secret errand unto thee," and his
"message from God unto thee," and then pulls out his hidden knife with
that unsuspected hand of his,---(the Little Gentleman lifted his clenched
left hand with the blood-red jewel on the ring-finger,)--and runs it,
blade and haft, into a man's stomach! Don't meddle with these fellows,
Sir.  They are read mostly by persons whom you would not reach, if you
were to write ever so much. Let 'em alone.  A man whose opinions are not
attacked is beneath contempt.

I hope so,--I said.--I got three pamphlets and innumerable squibs flung
at my head for attacking one of the pseudo-sciences, in former years.
When, by the permission of Providence, I held up to the professional
public the damnable facts connected with the conveyance of poison from
one young mother's chamber to another's,--for doing which humble office I
desire to be thankful that I have lived, though nothing else good should
ever come of my life,--I had to bear the sneers of those whose position I
had assailed, and, as I believe, have at last demolished, so that nothing
but the ghosts of dead women stir among the ruins.--What would you do, if
the folks without names kept at you, trying to get a San Benito on to
your shoulders that would fit you?--Would you stand still in fly-time, or
would you give a kick now and then?

Let 'em bite!--said the Little Gentleman,--let 'em bite!  It makes 'em
hungry to shake 'em off, and they settle down again as thick as ever and
twice as savage.  Do you know what meddling with the folks without names,
as you call 'em, is like?--It is like riding at the quintaan.  You run
full tilt at the board, but the board is on a pivot, with a bag of sand
on an arm that balances it.  The board gives way as soon as you touch it;
and before you have got by, the bag of sand comes round whack on the back
of your neck.  "Ananias," for instance, pitches into your lecture, we
will say, in some paper taken by the people in your kitchen.  Your
servants get saucy and negligent.  If their newspaper calls you names,
they need not be so particular about shutting doors softly or boiling
potatoes.  So you lose your temper, and come out in an article which you
think is going to finish "Ananias," proving him a booby who doesn't know
enough to understand even a lyceum-lecture, or else a person that tells
lies. Now you think you 've got him!  Not so fast.  "Ananias" keeps still
and winks to "Shimei," and "Shimei" comes out in the paper which they
take in your neighbor's kitchen, ten times worse than t'other fellow. If
you meddle with "Shimei," he steps out, and next week appears
"Rab-shakeh," an unsavory wretch; and now, at any rate, you find out what
good sense there was in Hezekiah's "Answer him not."--No, no,--keep your
temper.--So saying, the Little Gentleman doubled his left fist and looked
at it as if he should like to hit something or somebody a most pernicious
punch with it.

Good!--said I.--Now let me give you some axioms I have arrived at, after
seeing something of a great many kinds of good folks.

--Of a hundred people of each of the different leading religious sects,
about the same proportion will be safe and pleasant persons to deal and
to live with.

--There are, at least, three real saints among the women to one among the
men, in every denomination.

--The spiritual standard of different classes I would reckon thus:

     1.  The comfortably rich.
     2.  The decently comfortable.
     3.  The very rich, who are apt to be irreligious.
     4.  The very poor, who are apt to be immoral.

--The cut nails of machine-divinity may be driven in, but they won't
clinch.

--The arguments which the greatest of our schoolmen could not refute were
two: the blood in men's veins, and the milk in women's breasts.

--Humility is the first of the virtues--for other people.

--Faith always implies the disbelief of a lesser fact in favor of a
greater.  A little mind often sees the unbelief, without seeing the
belief of a large one.

The Poor Relation had been fidgeting about and working her mouth while
all this was going on.  She broke out in speech at this point.

I hate to hear folks talk so.  I don't see that you are any better than a
heathen.

I wish I were half as good as many heathens have been,--I said.--Dying
for a principle seems to me a higher degree of virtue than scolding for
it; and the history of heathen races is full of instances where men have
laid down their lives for the love of their kind, of their country, of
truth, nay, even for simple manhood's sake, or to show their obedience or
fidelity.  What would not such beings have done for the souls of men, for
the Christian commonwealth, for the King of Kings, if they had lived in
days of larger light?  Which seems to you nearest heaven, Socrates
drinking his hemlock, Regulus going back to the enemy's camp, or that old
New England divine sitting comfortably in his study and chuckling over
his conceit of certain poor women, who had been burned to death in his
own town, going "roaring out of one fire into another"?

I don't believe he said any such thing,--replied the Poor Relation.

It is hard to believe,--said I,--but it is true for all that.  In another
hundred years it will be as incredible that men talked as we sometimes
hear them now.

Pectus est quod facit theologum.  The heart makes the theologian. Every
race, every civilization, either has a new revelation of its own or a new
interpretation of an old one.  Democratic America, has a different
humanity from feudal Europe, and so must have a new divinity.  See, for
one moment, how intelligence reacts on our faiths.  The Bible was a
divining-book to our ancestors, and is so still in the hands of some of
the vulgar.  The Puritans went to the Old Testament for their laws; the
Mormons go to it for their patriarchal institution.  Every generation
dissolves something new and precipitates something once held in solution
from that great storehouse of temporary and permanent truths.

You may observe this: that the conversation of intelligent men of the
stricter sects is strangely in advance of the formula that belong to
their organizations.  So true is this, that I have doubts whether a large
proportion of them would not have been rather pleased than offended, if
they could have overheard our, talk.  For, look you, I think there is
hardly a professional teacher who will not in private conversation allow
a large part of what we have said, though it may frighten him in print;
and I know well what an under-current of secret sympathy gives vitality
to those poor words of mine which sometimes get a hearing.

I don't mind the exclamation of any old stager who drinks Madeira worth
from two to six Bibles a bottle, and burns, according to his own
premises, a dozen souls a year in the cigars with which he muddles his
brains.  But as for the good and true and intelligent men whom we see all
around us, laborious, self-denying, hopeful, helpful,--men who know that
the active mind of the century is tending more and more to the two poles,
Rome and Reason, the sovereign church or the free soul, authority or
personality, God in us or God in our masters, and that, though a man may
by accident stand half-way between these two points, he must look one way
or the other,--I don't believe they would take offence at anything I have
reported of our late conversation.

But supposing any one do take offence at first sight, let him look over
these notes again, and see whether he is quite sure he does not agree
with most of these things that were said amongst us.  If he agrees with
most of them, let him be patient with an opinion he does not accept, or
an expression or illustration a little too vivacious. I don't know that I
shall report any more conversations on these topics; but I do insist on
the right to express a civil opinion on this class of subjects without
giving offence, just when and where I please,---unless, as in the
lecture-room, there is an implied contract to keep clear of doubtful
matters.  You did n't think a man could sit at a breakfast-table doing
nothing but making puns every morning for a year or two, and never give a
thought to the two thousand of his fellow-creatures who are passing into
another state during every hour that he sits talking and laughing.  Of
course, the one matter that a real human being cares for is what is going
to become of them and of him.  And the plain truth is, that a good many
people are saying one thing about it and believing another.

--How do I know that?  Why, I have known and loved to talk with good
people, all the way from Rome to Geneva in doctrine, as long as I can
remember.  Besides, the real religion of the world comes from women much
more than from men,--from mothers most of all, who carry the key of our
souls in their bosoms.  It is in their hearts that the "sentimental"
religion some people are so fond of sneering at has its source.  The
sentiment of love, the sentiment of maternity, the sentiment of the
paramount obligation of the parent to the child as having called it into
existence, enhanced just in proportion to the power and knowledge of the
one and the weakness and ignorance of the other,--these are the
"sentiments" that have kept our soulless systems from driving men off to
die in holes like those that riddle the sides of the hill opposite the
Monastery of St. Saba, where the miserable victims of a
falsely-interpreted religion starved and withered in their delusion.

I have looked on the face of a saintly woman this very day, whose creed
many dread and hate, but whose life is lovely and noble beyond all
praise.  When I remember the bitter words I have heard spoken against her
faith, by men who have an Inquisition which excommunicates those who ask
to leave their communion in peace, and an Index Expurgatorius on which
this article may possibly have the honor of figuring,--and, far worse
than these, the reluctant, pharisaical confession, that it might perhaps
be possible that one who so believed should be accepted of the
Creator,--and then recall the sweet peace and love that show through all
her looks, the price of untold sacrifices and labors, and again recollect
how thousands of women, filled with the same spirit, die, without a
murmur, to earthly life, die to their own names even, that they may know
nothing but their holy duties,--while men are torturing and denouncing
their fellows, and while we can hear day and night the clinking of the
hammers that are trying, like the brute forces in the "Prometheus," to
rivet their adamantine wedges right through the breast of human
nature,--I have been ready to believe that we have even now a new
revelation, and the name of its Messiah is WOMAN!

--I should be sorry,--I remarked, a day or two afterwards, to the
divinity-student,--if anything I said tended in any way to foster any
jealousy between the professions, or to throw disrespect upon that one on
whose counsel and sympathies almost all of us lean in our moments of
trial.  But we are false to our new conditions of life, if we do not
resolutely maintain our religious as well as our political freedom, in
the face of any and all supposed monopolies.  Certain men will, of
course, say two things, if we do not take their views: first, that we
don't know anything about these matters; and, secondly, that we are not
so good as they are.  They have a polarized phraseology for saying these
things, but it comes to precisely that. To which it may be answered, in
the first place, that we have good authority for saying that even babes
and sucklings know something; and, in the second, that, if there is a
mote or so to be removed from our premises, the courts and councils of
the last few years have found beams enough in some other quarters to
build a church that would hold all the good people in Boston and have
sticks enough left to make a bonfire for all the heretics.

As to that terrible depolarizing process of mine, of which we were
talking the other day, I will give you a specimen of one way of managing
it, if you like.  I don't believe it will hurt you or anybody.  Besides,
I had a great deal rather finish our talk with pleasant images and gentle
words than with sharp sayings, which will only afford a text, if anybody
repeats them, for endless relays of attacks from Messrs.  Ananias,
Shimei, and Rabshakeh.

[I must leave such gentry, if any of them show themselves, in the hands
of my clerical friends, many of whom are ready to stand up for the rights
of the laity,--and to those blessed souls, the good women, to whom this
version of the story of a mother's hidden hopes and tender anxieties is
dedicated by their peaceful and loving servant.]



               A MOTHER'S SECRET.

     How sweet the sacred legend--if unblamed
     In my slight verse such holy things are named
     --Of Mary's secret hours of hidden joy,
     Silent, but pondering on her wondrous boy!
     Ave, Maria!  Pardon, if I wrong
     Those heavenly words that shame my earthly song!

     The choral host had closed the angel's strain
     Sung to the midnight watch on Bethlehem's plain;
     And now the shepherds, hastening on their way,
     Sought the still hamlet where the Infant lay.
     They passed the fields that gleaning Ruth toiled O'er,
     They saw afar the ruined threshing-floor
     Where Moab's daughter, homeless and forlorn,
     Found Boaz slumbering by his heaps of corn;
     And some remembered how the holy scribe,
     Skilled in the lore of every jealous tribe,
     Traced the warm blood of Jesse's royal son
     To that fair alien, bravely wooed and won.
     So fared they on to seek the promised sign
     That marked the anointed heir of David's line.

     At last, by forms of earthly semblance led,
     They found the crowded inn, the oxen's shed.
     No pomp was there, no glory shone around
     On the coarse straw that strewed the reeking ground;
     One dim retreat a flickering torch betrayed,
     In that poor cell the Lord of Life was laid!

     The wondering shepherds told their breathless tale
     Of the bright choir that woke the sleeping vale;
     Told how the skies with sudden glory flamed;
     Told how the shining multitude proclaimed
     "Joy, joy to earth!  Behold the hallowed morn!
     In David's city Christ the Lord is born!
     'Glory to God!' let angels shout on high,
     'Good-will to men!' the listening Earth reply!"

     They spoke with hurried words and accents wild;
     Calm in his cradle slept the heavenly child.
     No trembling word the mother's joy revealed,
     One sigh of rapture, and her lips were sealed;
     Unmoved she saw the rustic train depart,
     But kept their words to ponder in her heart.

     Twelve years had passed; the boy was fair and tall,
     Growing in wisdom, finding grace with all.
     The maids of Nazareth, as they trooped to fill
     Their balanced urns beside the mountain-rill,
     The gathered matrons, as they sat and spun,
     Spoke in soft words of Joseph's quiet son.
     No voice had reached the Galilean vale
     Of star-led kings or awe-struck shepherds' tale;
     In the meek, studious child they only saw
     The future Rabbi, learned in Israel's law.

     So grew the boy; and now the feast was near,
     When at the holy place the tribes appear.
     Scarce had the home-bred child of Nazareth seen
     Beyond the hills that girt the village-green,
     Save when at midnight, o'er the star-lit sands,
     Snatched from the steel of Herod's murdering bands,
     A babe, close-folded to his mother's breast,
     Through Edom's wilds he sought the sheltering West.

     Then Joseph spake: "Thy boy hath largely grown;
     Weave him fine raiment, fitting to be shown;
     Fair robes beseem the pilgrim, as the priest
     Goes he not with us to the holy feast?"

     And Mary culled the flaxen fibres white;
     Till eve she spun; she spun till morning light.
     The thread was twined; its parting meshes through
     From hand to hand her restless shuttle flew,
     Till the full web was wound upon the beam,
     Love's curious toil,--a vest without a seam!

     They reach the holy place, fulfil the days
     To solemn feasting given, and grateful praise.
     At last they turn, and far Moriah's height
     Melts in the southern sky and fades from sight.
     All day the dusky caravan has flowed
     In devious trails along the winding road,
     (For many a step their homeward path attends,
     And all the sons of Abraham are as friends.)
     Evening has come,--the hour of rest and joy;
     Hush! hush!--that whisper,-"Where is Mary's boy?"

     O weary hour!  O aching days that passed
     Filled with strange fears, each wilder than the last:
     The soldier's lance,--the fierce centurion's sword,
     The crushing wheels that whirl some Roman lord,
     The midnight crypt that suck's the captive's breath,
     The blistering sun on Hinnom's vale of death!

     Thrice on his cheek had rained the morning light,
     Thrice on his lips the mildewed kiss of night,
     Crouched by some porphyry column's shining plinth,
     Or stretched beneath the odorous terebinth.

     At last, in desperate mood, they sought once more
     The Temple's porches, searched in vain before;
     They found him seated with the ancient men,
     The grim old rufflers of the tongue and pen,
     Their bald heads glistening as they clustered near;
     Their gray beards slanting as they turned to hear,
     Lost in half-envious wonder and surprise
     That lips so fresh should utter words so wise.

     And Mary said,--as one who, tried too long,
     Tells all her grief and half her sense of wrong,
     "What is this thoughtless thing which thou hast done?
     Lo, we have sought thee sorrowing, O my son!"
     Few words he spake, and scarce of filial tone,
     Strange words, their sense a mystery yet unknown;
     Then turned with them and left the holy hill,
     To all their mild commands obedient still.

     The tale was told to Nazareth's sober men,
     And Nazareth's matrons told it oft again;
     The maids retold it at the fountain's side;
     The youthful shepherds doubted or denied;
     It passed around among the listening friends,
     With all that fancy adds and fiction fends,
     Till newer marvels dimmed the young renown
     Of Joseph's son, who talked the Rabbis down.

     But Mary, faithful to its lightest word,
     Kept in her heart the sayings she had heard,
     Till the dread morning rent the Temple's veil,
     And shuddering Earth confirmed the wondrous tale.

     Youth fades; love droops; the leaves of friendship fall;
     A mother's secret hope outlives them all.




VI

You don't look so dreadful poor in the face as you did a while back.
Bloated some, I expect.

This was the cheerful and encouraging and elegant remark with which the
Poor Relation greeted the divinity-student one morning.

Of course every good man considers it a great sacrifice on his part to
continue living in this transitory, unsatisfactory, and particularly
unpleasant world.  This is so much a matter of course, that I was
surprised to see the divinity-student change color.  He took a look at a
small and uncertain-minded glass which hung slanting forward over the
chapped sideboard.  The image it returned to him had the color of a very
young pea somewhat overboiled.  The scenery of a long tragic drama
flashed through his mind as the lightning-express-train whishes by a
station: the gradual dismantling process of disease; friends looking on,
sympathetic, but secretly chuckling over their own stomachs of iron and
lungs of caoutchouc; nurses attentive, but calculating their crop, and
thinking how soon it will be ripe, so that they can go to your neighbor,
who is good for a year or so longer; doctors assiduous, but giving
themselves a mental shake, as they go out of your door, which throws off
your particular grief as a duck sheds a raindrop from his oily feathers;
undertakers solemn, but happy; then the great subsoil cultivator, who
plants, but never looks for fruit in his garden; then the stone-cutter,
who puts your name on the slab which has been waiting for you ever since
the birds or beasts made their tracks on the new red sandstone; then the
grass and the dandelions and the buttercups,----Earth saying to the
mortal body, with her sweet symbolism, "You have scarred my bosom, but
you are forgiven"; then a glimpse of the soul as a floating consciousness
without very definite form or place, but dimly conceived of as an upright
column of vapor or mist several times larger than life-size, so far as it
could be said to have any size at all, wandering about and living a thin
and half-awake life for want of good old-fashioned solid matter to come
down upon with foot and fist,--in fact, having neither foot nor fist, nor
conveniences for taking the sitting posture.

And yet the divinity-student was a good Christian, and those heathen
images which remind one of the childlike fancies of the dying Adrian were
only the efforts of his imagination to give shape to the formless and
position to the placeless.  Neither did his thoughts spread themselves
out and link themselves as I have displayed them. They came confusedly
into his mind like a heap of broken mosaics,--sometimes a part of the
picture complete in itself, sometimes connected fragments, and sometimes
only single severed stones.

They did not diffuse a light of celestial joy over his countenance. On
the contrary, the Poor Relation's remark turned him pale, as I have said;
and when the terrible wrinkled and jaundiced looking-glass turned him
green in addition, and he saw himself in it, it seemed to him as if it
were all settled, and his book of life were to be shut not yet half-read,
and go back to the dust of the under-ground archives.  He coughed a mild
short cough, as if to point the direction in which his downward path was
tending.  It was an honest little cough enough, so far as appearances
went.  But coughs are ungrateful things.  You find one out in the cold,
take it up and nurse it and make everything of it, dress it up warm, give
it all sorts of balsams and other food it likes, and carry it round in
your bosom as if it were a miniature lapdog.  And by-and-by its little
bark grows sharp and savage, and--confound the thing!--you find it is a
wolf's whelp that you have got there, and he is gnawing in the breast
where he has been nestling so long.--The Poor Relation said that
somebody's surrup was good for folks that were gettin' into a bad
way.--The landlady had heard of desperate cases cured by
cherry-pictorial.

Whiskey's the fellah,--said the young man John.--Make it into punch, cold
at dinner-time 'n' hot at bed-time.  I'll come up 'n' show you how to mix
it.  Have n't any of you seen the wonderful fat man exhibitin' down in
Hanover Street?

Master Benjamin Franklin rushed into the dialogue with a breezy
exclamation, that he had seen a great picter outside of the place where
the fat man was exhibitin'.  Tried to get in at half-price, but the man
at the door looked at his teeth and said he was more'n ten year old.

It is n't two years,--said the young man John, since that fat fellah was
exhibitin' here as the Livin' Skeleton.  Whiskey--that's what did
it,--real Burbon's the stuff.  Hot water, sugar, 'n' jest a little
shavin' of lemon-skin in it,--skin, mind you, none o' your juice; take it
off thin,--shape of one of them flat curls the factory-girls wear on the
sides of their foreheads.

But I am a teetotaller,--said the divinity-student in a subdued
tone;--not noticing the enormous length of the bow-string the young
fellow had just drawn.

He took up his hat and went out.

I think you have worried that young man more than you meant,--I said.--I
don't believe he will jump off one of the bridges, for he has too much
principle; but I mean to follow him and see where he goes, for he looks
as if his mind were made up to something.

I followed him at a reasonable distance.  He walked doggedly along,
looking neither to the right nor the left, turned into State Street, and
made for a well-known Life-Insurance Office.  Luckily, the doctor was
there and overhauled him on the spot.  There was nothing the matter with
him, he said, and he could have his life insured as a sound one.  He came
out in good spirits, and told me this soon after.

This led me to make some remarks the next morning on the manners of
well-bred and ill-bred people.

I began,--The whole essence of true gentle-breeding (one does not like to
say gentility) lies in the wish and the art to be agreeable.
Good-breeding is surface-Christianity.  Every look, movement, tone,
expression, subject of discourse, that may give pain to another is
habitually excluded from conversational intercourse.  This is the reason
why rich people are apt to be so much more agreeable than others.

--I thought you were a great champion of equality,--said the discreet and
severe lady who had accompanied our young friend, the Latin Tutor's
daughter.

I go politically for equality,--I said,--and socially for the quality.

Who are the "quality,"--said the Model, etc., in a community like ours?

I confess I find this question a little difficult to answer,--I said.
--Nothing is better known than the distinction of social ranks which
exists in every community, and nothing is harder to define.  The great
gentlemen and ladies of a place are its real lords and masters and
mistresses; they are the quality, whether in a monarchy or a republic;
mayors and governors and generals and senators and ex-presidents are
nothing to them.  How well we know this, and how seldom it finds a
distinct expression!  Now I tell you truly, I believe in man as man, and
I disbelieve in all distinctions except such as follow the natural lines
of cleavage in a society which has crystallized according to its own true
laws.  But the essence of equality is to be able to say the truth; and
there is nothing more curious than these truths relating to the
stratification of society.

Of all the facts in this world that do not take hold of immortality,
there is not one so intensely real, permanent, and engrossing as this of
social position,--as you see by the circumstances that the core of all
the great social orders the world has seen has been, and is still, for
the most part, a privileged class of gentlemen and ladies arranged in a
regular scale of precedence among themselves, but superior as a body to
all else.

Nothing but an ideal Christian equality, which we have been getting
farther away from since the days of the Primitive Church, can prevent
this subdivision of society into classes from taking place
everywhere,--in the great centres of our republic as much as in old
European monarchies.  Only there position is more absolutely
hereditary,--here it is more completely elective.

--Where is the election held? and what are the qualifications? and who
are the electors?--said the Model.

Nobody ever sees when the vote is taken; there never is a formal vote.
The women settle it mostly; and they know wonderfully well what is
presentable, and what can't stand the blaze of the chandeliers and the
critical eye and ear of people trained to know a staring shade in a
ribbon, a false light in a jewel, an ill-bred tone, an angular movement,
everything that betrays a coarse fibre and cheap training.  As a general
thing, you do not get elegance short of two or three removes from the
soil, out of which our best blood doubtless comes,--quite as good, no
doubt, as if it came from those old prize-fighters with iron pots on
their heads, to whom some great people are so fond of tracing their
descent through a line of small artisans and petty shopkeepers whose
veins have held "base" fluid enough to fill the Cloaca Maxima!

Does not money go everywhere?--said the Model.

Almost.  And with good reason.  For though there are numerous exceptions,
rich people are, as I said, commonly altogether the most agreeable
companions.  The influence of a fine house, graceful furniture, good
libraries, well-ordered tables, trim servants, and, above all, a position
so secure that one becomes unconscious of it, gives a harmony and
refinement to the character and manners which we feel, if we cannot
explain their charm.  Yet we can get at the reason of it by thinking a
little.

All these appliances are to shield the sensibility from disagreeable
contacts, and to soothe it by varied natural and artificial influences.
In this way the mind, the taste, the feelings, grow delicate, just as the
hands grow white and soft when saved from toil and incased in soft
gloves.  The whole nature becomes subdued into suavity.  I confess I like
the quality ladies better than the common kind even of literary ones.
They have n't read the last book, perhaps, but they attend better to you
when you are talking to them. If they are never learned, they make up for
it in tact and elegance. Besides, I think, on the whole, there is less
self-assertion in diamonds than in dogmas.  I don't know where you will
find a sweeter portrait of humility than in Esther, the poor play-girl of
King Ahasuerus; yet Esther put on her royal apparel when she went before
her lord.  I have no doubt she was a more gracious and agreeable person
than Deborah, who judged the people and wrote the story of Sisera.  The
wisest woman you talk with is ignorant of something that you know, but an
elegant woman never forgets her elegance.

Dowdyism is clearly an expression of imperfect vitality.  The highest
fashion is intensely alive,--not alive necessarily to the truest and best
things, but with its blood tingling, as it were, in all its extremities
and to the farthest point of its surface, so that the feather in its
bonnet is as fresh as the crest of a fighting-cock, and the rosette on
its slipper as clean-cut and pimpant (pronounce it English fashion,--it
is a good word) as a dahlia.  As a general rule, that society where
flattery is acted is much more agreeable than that where it is spoken.
Don't you see why?  Attention and deference don't require you to make
fine speeches expressing your sense of unworthiness (lies) and returning
all the compliments paid you.  This is one reason.

--A woman of sense ought to be above flattering any man,--said the Model.

[My reflection.  Oh! oh! no wonder you did n't get married.  Served you
right.]  My remark.  Surely, Madam,--if you mean by flattery telling
people boldly to their faces that they are this or that, which they are
not.  But a woman who does not carry about with her wherever she goes a
halo of good feeling and desire to make everybody contented,--an
atmosphere of grace, mercy, and peace, of at least six feet radius, which
wraps every human being upon whom she voluntarily bestows her presence,
and so flatters him with the comfortable thought that she is rather glad
he is alive than otherwise, isn't worth the trouble of talking to, as a
woman; she may do well enough to hold discussions with.

--I don't think the Model exactly liked this.  She said,--a little
spitefully, I thought,--that a sensible man might stand a little praise,
but would of course soon get sick of it, if he were in the habit of
getting much.

Oh, yes,--I replied,--just as men get sick of tobacco.  It is notorious
how apt they are to get tired of that vegetable.

--That 's so!--said the young fellow John,--I've got tired of my cigars
and burnt 'em all up.

I am heartily glad to hear it,--said the Model,--I wish they were all
disposed of in the same way.

So do I,--said the young fellow John.

Can't you get your friends to unite with you in committing those odious
instruments of debauchery to the flames in which you have consumed your
own?

I wish I could,--said the young fellow John.

It would be a noble sacrifice,--said the Model, and every American woman
would be grateful to you.  Let us burn them all in a heap out in the
yard.

That a'n't my way,--said the young fellow John;--I burn 'em one 't'
time,--little end in my mouth and big end outside.

--I watched for the effect of this sudden change of programme, when it
should reach the calm stillness of the Model's interior apprehension, as
a boy watches for the splash of a stone which he has dropped into a well.
But before it had fairly reached the water, poor Iris, who had followed
the conversation with a certain interest until it turned this sharp
corner, (for she seems rather to fancy the young fellow John,) laughed
out such a clear, loud laugh, that it started us all off, as the
locust-cry of some full-throated soprano drags a multitudinous chorus
after it.  It was plain that some dam or other had broken in the soul of
this young girl, and she was squaring up old scores of laughter, out of
which she had been cheated, with a grand flood of merriment that swept
all before it. So we had a great laugh all round, in which the
Model--who, if she had as many virtues as there are spokes to a wheel,
all compacted with a personality as round and complete as its tire, yet
wanted that one little addition of grace, which seems so small, and is as
important as the linchpin in trundling over the rough ways of life--had
not the tact to join.  She seemed to be "stuffy" about it, as the young
fellow John said.  In fact, I was afraid the joke would have cost us both
our new lady-boarders.  It had no effect, however, except, perhaps, to
hasten the departure of the elder of the two, who could, on the whole, be
spared.

--I had meant to make this note of our conversation a text for a few
axioms on the matter of breeding.  But it so happened, that, exactly at
this point of my record, a very distinguished philosopher, whom several
of our boarders and myself go to hear, and whom no doubt many of my
readers follow habitually, treated this matter of manners.  Up to this
point, if I have been so fortunate as to coincide with him in opinion,
and so unfortunate as to try to express what he has more felicitously
said, nobody is to blame; for what has been given thus far was all
written before the lecture was delivered.  But what shall I do now?  He
told us it was childish to lay down rules for deportment,--but he could
not help laying down a few.

Thus,--Nothing so vulgar as to be in a hurry.  True, but hard of
application.  People with short legs step quickly, because legs are
pendulums, and swing more times in a minute the shorter they are.
Generally a natural rhythm runs through the whole organization: quick
pulse, fast breathing, hasty speech, rapid trains of thought, excitable
temper.  Stillness of person and steadiness of features are signal marks
of good-breeding.  Vulgar persons can't sit still, or, at least, they
must work their limbs or features.

Talking of one's own ails and grievances.--Bad enough, but not so bad as
insulting the person you talk with by remarking on his ill-looks, or
appealing to notice any of his personal peculiarities.

Apologizing.--A very desperate habit,--one that is rarely cured. Apology
is only egotism wrong side out.  Nine times out of ten, the first thing a
man's companion knows of his shortcoming is from his apology.  It is
mighty presumptuous on your part to suppose your small failures of so
much consequence that you must make a talk about them.

Good dressing, quiet ways, low tones of voice, lips that can wait, and
eyes that do not wander,--shyness of personalities, except in certain
intimate communions,--to be light in hand in conversation, to have ideas,
but to be able to make talk, if necessary, without them,--to belong to
the company you are in, and not to yourself,--to have nothing in your
dress or furniture so fine that you cannot afford to spoil it and get
another like it, yet to preserve the harmonies, throughout your person
and--dwelling: I should say that this was a fair capital of manners to
begin with.

Under bad manners, as under graver faults, lies very commonly an
overestimate of our special individuality, as distinguished from our
generic humanity.  It is just here that the very highest society asserts
its superior breeding.  Among truly elegant people of the highest ton,
you will find more real equality in social intercourse than in a country
village.  As nuns drop their birth-names and become Sister Margaret and
Sister Mary, so high-bred people drop their personal distinctions and
become brothers and sisters of conversational charity.  Nor are
fashionable people without their heroism.  I believe there are men who
have shown as much self-devotion in carrying a lone wall-flower down to
the supper-table as ever saint or martyr in the act that has canonized
his name.  There are Florence Nightingales of the ballroom, whom nothing
can hold back from their errands of mercy.  They find out the red-handed,
gloveless undergraduate of bucolic antecedents, as he squirms in his
corner, and distill their soft words upon him like dew upon the green
herb.  They reach even the poor relation, whose dreary apparition saddens
the perfumed atmosphere of the sumptuous drawing-room.  I have known one
of these angels ask, of her own accord, that a desolate middle-aged man,
whom nobody seemed to know, should be presented to her by the hostess.
He wore no shirt-collar,--he had on black gloves,--and was flourishing a
red bandanna handkerchief! Match me this, ye proud children of poverty,
who boast of your paltry sacrifices for each other!  Virtue in humble
life!  What is that to the glorious self-renunciation of a martyr in
pearls and diamonds?  As I saw this noble woman bending gracefully before
the social mendicant,--the white billows of her beauty heaving under the
foam of the traitorous laces that half revealed them,--I should have wept
with sympathetic emotion, but that tears, except as a private
demonstration, are an ill-disguised expression of self-consciousness and
vanity, which is inadmissible in good society.

I have sometimes thought, with a pang, of the position in which political
chance or contrivance might hereafter place some one of our
fellow-citizens.  It has happened hitherto, so far as my limited
knowledge goes, that the President of the United States has always been
what might be called in general terms a gentleman.  But what if at some
future time the choice of the people should fall upon one on whom that
lofty title could not, by any stretch of charity, be bestowed?  This may
happen,--how soon the future only knows.  Think of this miserable man of
coming political possibilities,--an unpresentable boor sucked into office
by one of those eddies in the flow of popular sentiment which carry
straws and chips into the public harbor, while the prostrate trunks of
the monarchs of the forest hurry down on the senseless stream to the gulf
of political oblivion!  Think of him, I say, and of the concentrated gaze
of good society through its thousand eyes, all confluent, as it were, in
one great burning-glass of ice that shrivels its wretched object in fiery
torture, itself cold as the glacier of an unsunned cavern! No,--there
will be angels of good-breeding then as now, to shield the victim of free
institutions from himself and from his torturers. I can fancy a lovely
woman playfully withdrawing the knife which he would abuse by making it
an instrument for the conveyance of food,--or, failing in this kind
artifice, sacrificing herself by imitating his use of that implement; how
much harder than to plunge it into her bosom, like Lucretia!  I can see
her studying in his provincial dialect until she becomes the Champollion
of New England or Western or Southern barbarisms.  She has learned that
haow means what; that think-in' is the same thing as thinking, or she has
found out the meaning of that extraordinary mono syllable, which no
single-tongued phonographer can make legible, prevailing on the banks of
the Hudson and at its embouchure, and elsewhere,--what they say when they
think they say first, (fe-eest,--fe as in the French le),--or that cheer
means chair,--or that urritation means irritation,--and so of other
enormities.  Nothing surprises her.  The highest breeding, you know,
comes round to the Indian standard,--to take everything coolly,--nil
admirari,--if you happen to be learned and like the Roman phrase for the
same thing.

If you like the company of people that stare at you from head to foot to
see if there is a hole in your coat, or if you have not grown a little
older, or if your eyes are not yellow with jaundice, or if your
complexion is not a little faded, and so on, and then convey the fact to
you, in the style in which the Poor Relation addressed the
divinity-student,--go with them as much as you like. I hate the sight of
the wretches.  Don't for mercy's sake think I hate them; the distinction
is one my friend or I drew long ago.  No matter where you find such
people; they are clowns.

The rich woman who looks and talks in this way is not half so much a lady
as her Irish servant, whose pretty "saving your presence," when she has
to say something which offends her natural sense of good manners, has a
hint in it of the breeding of courts, and the blood of old Milesian
kings, which very likely runs in her veins,--thinned by two hundred years
of potato, which, being an underground fruit, tends to drag down the
generations that are made of it to the earth from which it came, and,
filling their veins with starch, turn them into a kind of human
vegetable.

I say, if you like such people, go with them.  But I am going to make a
practical application of the example at the beginning of this particular
record, which some young people who are going to choose professional
advisers by-and-by may remember and thank me for.  If you are making
choice of a physician, be sure you get one, if possible, with a cheerful
and serene countenance.  A physician is not--at least, ought not to
be--an executioner; and a sentence of death on his face is as bad as a
warrant for execution signed by the Governor.  As a general rule, no man
has a right to tell another by word or look that he is going to die.  It
may be necessary in some extreme cases; but as a rule, it is the last
extreme of impertinence which one human being can offer to another.  "You
have killed me," said a patient once to a physician who had rashly told
him he was incurable.  He ought to have lived six months, but he was dead
in six' weeks.  If we will only let Nature and the God of Nature alone,
persons will commonly learn their condition as early as they ought to
know it, and not be cheated out of their natural birthright of hope of
recovery, which is intended to accompany sick people as long as life is
comfortable, and is graciously replaced by the hope of heaven, or at
least of rest, when life has become a burden which the bearer is ready to
let fall.

Underbred people tease their sick and dying friends to death.  The chance
of a gentleman or lady with a given mortal ailment to live a certain time
is as good again as that of the common sort of coarse people.  As you go
down the social scale, you reach a point at length where the common talk
in sick rooms is of churchyards and sepulchres, and a kind of perpetual
vivisection is forever carried on, upon the person of the miserable
sufferer.

And so, in choosing your clergyman, other things being equal, prefer the
one of a wholesome and cheerful habit of mind and body.  If you can get
along with people who carry a certificate in their faces that their
goodness is so great as to make them very miserable, your children
cannot.  And whatever offends one of these little ones cannot be right in
the eyes of Him who loved them so well.

After all, as you are a gentleman or a lady, you will probably select
gentlemen for your bodily and spiritual advisers, and then all will be
right.

This repetition of the above words,--gentleman and lady,--which could not
be conveniently avoided, reminds me what strange uses are made of them by
those who ought to know what they mean.  Thus, at a marriage ceremony,
once, of two very excellent persons who had been at service, instead of,
Do you take this man, etc.? and, Do you take this woman? how do you think
the officiating clergyman put the questions?  It was, Do you, Miss So and
So, take this GENTLEMAN? and, Do you, Mr. This or That, take this LADY?!
What would any English duchess, ay, or the Queen of England herself, have
thought, if the Archbishop of Canterbury had called her and her
bridegroom anything but plain woman and man at such a time?

I don't doubt the Poor Relation thought it was all very fine, if she
happened to be in the church; but if the worthy man who uttered these
monstrous words--monstrous in such a connection--had known the ludicrous
surprise, the convulsion of inward disgust and contempt, that seized upon
many of the persons who were present,--had guessed what a sudden flash of
light it threw on the Dutch gilding, the pinchbeck, the shabby, perking
pretension belonging to certain social layers,--so inherent in their
whole mode of being, that the holiest offices of religion cannot exclude
its impertinences,--the good man would have given his marriage-fee twice
over to recall that superb and full-blown vulgarism.  Any persons whom it
could please could have no better notion of what the words referred to
signify than of the meaning of apsides and asymptotes.

MAN!  Sir!  WOMAN!  Sir!  Gentility is a fine thing, not to be
undervalued, as I have been trying to explain; but humanity comes before
that.

         "When Adam delved and Eve span,
          Who was then the gentleman?"

The beauty of that plainness of speech and manners which comes from the
finest training is not to be understood by those whose habitat is below a
certain level.  Just as the exquisite sea-anemones and all the graceful
ocean-flowers die out at some fathoms below the surface, the elegances
and suavities of life die out one by one as we sink through the social
scale.  Fortunately, the virtues are more tenacious of life, and last
pretty well until we get down to the mud of absolute pauperism, where
they do not flourish greatly.

--I had almost forgotten about our boarders.  As the Model of all the
Virtues is about to leave us, I find myself wondering what is the reason
we are not all very sorry.  Surely we all like good persons.  She is a
good person.  Therefore we like her.--Only we don't.

This brief syllogism, and its briefer negative, involving the principle
which some English conveyancer borrowed from a French wit and embodied in
the lines by which Dr. Fell is made unamiably immortal, this syllogism, I
say, is one that most persons have had occasion to construct and
demolish, respecting somebody or other, as I have done for the Model.
"Pious and painefull."  Why has that excellent old phrase gone out of
use?  Simply because these good painefull or painstaking persons proved
to be such nuisances in the long run, that the word "painefull" came,
before people thought of it, to mean pain-giving instead of painstaking.

--So, the old fellah's off to-morrah,--said the young man John.

Old fellow?--said I,--whom do you mean?

Why, the one that came with our little beauty, the old fellah in
petticoats.

--Now that means something,--said I to myself.--These rough young rascals
very often hit the nail on the head, if they do strike with their eyes
shut.  A real woman does a great many things without knowing why she does
them; but these pattern machines mix up their intellects with everything
they do, just like men.  They can't help it, no doubt; but we can't help
getting sick of them, either. Intellect is to a woman's nature what her
watch-spring skirt is to her dress; it ought to underlie her silks and
embroideries, but not to show itself too staringly on the outside.---You
don't know, perhaps, but I will tell you; the brain is the palest of all
the internal organs, and the heart the reddest.  Whatever comes from the
brain carries the hue of the place it came from, and whatever comes from
the heart carries the heat and color of its birthplace.

The young man John did not hear my soliloquy, of course, but sent up one
more bubble from our sinking conversation, in the form of a statement,
that she was at liberty to go to a personage who receives no visits, as
is commonly supposed, from virtuous people.

Why, I ask again, (of my reader,) should a person who never did anybody
any wrong, but, on the contrary, is an estimable and intelligent, nay, a
particularly enlightened and exemplary member of society, fail to inspire
interest, love, and devotion?  Because of the reversed current in the
flow of thought and emotion.  The red heart sends all its instincts up to
the white brain to be analyzed, chilled, blanched, and so become pure
reason, which is just exactly what we do not want of woman as woman.  The
current should run the other-way.  The nice, calm, cold thought, which in
women shapes itself so rapidly that they hardly know it as thought,
should always travel to the lips via the heart.  It does so in those
women whom all love and admire.  It travels the wrong way in the Model.
That is the reason why the Little Gentleman said "I hate her, I hate
her."  That is the reason why the young man John called her the "old
fellah," and banished her to the company of the great Unpresentable. That
is the reason why I, the Professor, am picking her to pieces with scalpel
and forceps.  That is the reason why the young girl whom she has
befriended repays her kindness with gratitude and respect, rather than
with the devotion and passionate fondness which lie sleeping beneath the
calmness of her amber eyes.  I can see her, as she sits between this
estimable and most correct of personages and the misshapen, crotchety,
often violent and explosive little man on the other side of her, leaning
and swaying towards him as she speaks, and looking into his sad eyes as
if she found some fountain in them at which her soul could quiet its
thirst.

Women like the Model are a natural product of a chilly climate and high
culture.  It is not

    "The frolic wind that breathes the spring,
     Zephyr with Aurora playing,"

when the two meet

    "---on beds of violets blue,
     And fresh-blown roses washed in dew,"

that claim such women as their offspring.  It is rather the east wind, as
it blows out of the fogs of Newfoundland, and clasps a clear-eyed wintry
noon on the chill bridal couch of a New England ice-quarry.--Don't throw
up your cap now, and hurrah as if this were giving up everything, and
turning against the best growth of our latitudes,--the daughters of the
soil.  The brain-women never interest us like the heart women; white
roses please less than red. But our Northern seasons have a narrow green
streak of spring, as well as a broad white zone of winter,--they have a
glowing band of summer and a golden stripe of autumn in their
many-colored wardrobe; and women are born to us that wear all these hues
of earth and heaven in their souls.  Our ice-eyed brain-women are really
admirable, if we only ask of them just what they can give, and no more.
Only compare them, talking or writing, with one of those babbling,
chattering dolls, of warmer latitudes, who do not know enough even to
keep out of print, and who are interesting to us only as specimens of
arrest of development for our psychological cabinets.

Good-bye, Model of all the Virtues!  We can spare you now.  A little
clear perfection, undiluted with human weakness, goes a great way. Go! be
useful, be honorable and honored, be just, be charitable, talk pure
reason, and help to disenchant the world by the light of an achromatic
understanding.  Goodbye!  Where is my Beranger?  I must read a verse or
two of "Fretillon."

Fair play for all.  But don't claim incompatible qualities for anybody.
Justice is a very rare virtue in our community. Everything that public
sentiment cares about is put into a Papin's digester, and boiled under
high pressure till all is turned into one homogeneous pulp, and the very
bones give up their jelly.  What are all the strongest epithets of our
dictionary to us now?  The critics and politicians, and especially the
philanthropists, have chewed them, till they are mere wads of
syllable-fibre, without a suggestion of their old pungency and power.

Justice!  A good man respects the rights even of brute matter and
arbitrary symbols.  If he writes the same word twice in succession, by
accident, he always erases the one that stands second; has not the
first-comer the prior right?  This act of abstract justice, which I trust
many of my readers, like myself, have often performed, is a curious
anti-illustration, by the way, of the absolute wickedness of human
dispositions.  Why doesn't a man always strike out the first of the two
words, to gratify his diabolical love of injustice?

So, I say, we owe a genuine, substantial tribute of respect to these
filtered intellects which have left their womanhood on the strainer. They
are so clear that it is a pleasure at times to look at the world of
thought through them.  But the rose and purple tints of richer natures
they cannot give us, and it is not just to them to ask it.

Fashionable society gets at these rich natures very often in a way one
would hardly at first think of.  It loves vitality above all things,
sometimes disguised by affected languor, always well kept under by the
laws of good-breeding,--but still it loves abundant life, opulent and
showy organizations,--the spherical rather than the plane trigonometry of
female architecture,--plenty of red blood, flashing eyes, tropical
voices, and forms that bear the splendors of dress without growing pale
beneath their lustre.  Among these you will find the most delicious women
you will ever meet,--women whom dress and flattery and the round of city
gayeties cannot spoil,--talking with whom, you forget their diamonds and
laces,--and around whom all the nice details of elegance, which the
cold-blooded beauty next them is scanning so nicely, blend in one
harmonious whole, too perfect to be disturbed by the petulant sparkle of
a jewel, or the yellow glare of a bangle, or the gay toss of a feather.

There are many things that I, personally, love better than fashion or
wealth.  Not to speak of those highest objects of our love and loyalty, I
think I love ease and independence better than the golden slavery of
perpetual matinees and soirees, or the pleasures of accumulation.

But fashion and wealth are two very solemn realities, which the frivolous
class of moralists have talked a great deal of silly stuff about.
Fashion is only the attempt to realize Art in living forms and social
intercourse.  What business has a man who knows nothing about the
beautiful, and cannot pronounce the word view, to talk about fashion to a
set of people who, if one of the quality left a card at their doors,
would contrive to keep it on the very top of their heap of the names of
their two-story acquaintances, till it was as yellow as the Codex
Vaticanus?

Wealth, too,--what an endless repetition of the same foolish trivialities
about it!  Take the single fact of its alleged uncertain tenure and
transitory character.  In old times, when men were all the time fighting
and robbing each other,--in those tropical countries where the Sabeans
and the Chaldeans stole all a man's cattle and camels, and there were
frightful tornadoes and rains of fire from heaven, it was true enough
that riches took wings to themselves not unfrequently in a very
unexpected way.  But, with common prudence in investments, it is not so
now.  In fact, there is nothing earthly that lasts so well, on the whole,
as money.  A man's learning dies with him; even his virtues fade out of
remembrance, but the dividends on the stocks he bequeaths to his children
live and keep his memory green.

I do not think there is much courage or originality in giving utterance
to truths that everybody knows, but which get overlaid by conventional
trumpery.  The only distinction which it is necessary to point out to
feeble-minded folk is this: that, in asserting the breadth and depth of
that significance which gives to fashion and fortune their tremendous
power, we do not indorse the extravagances which often disgrace the one,
nor the meanness which often degrades the other.

A remark which seems to contradict a universally current opinion is not
generally to be taken "neat," but watered with the ideas of common-sense
and commonplace people.  So, if any of my young friends should be tempted
to waste their substance on white kids and "all-rounds," or to insist on
becoming millionaires at once, by anything I have said, I will give them
references to some of the class referred to, well known to the public as
providers of literary diluents, who will weaken any truth so that there
is not an old woman in the land who cannot take it with perfect impunity.

I am afraid some of the blessed saints in diamonds will think I mean to
flatter them.  I hope not;--if I do, set it down as a weakness. But there
is so much foolish talk about wealth and fashion, (which, of course, draw
a good many heartless and essentially vulgar people into the glare of
their candelabra, but which have a real respectability and meaning, if we
will only look at them stereoscopically, with both eyes instead of one,)
that I thought it a duty to speak a few words for them.  Why can't
somebody give us a list of things that everybody thinks and nobody says,
and another list of things that everybody says and nobody thinks?

Lest my parish should suppose we have forgotten graver matters in
these lesser topics, I beg them to drop these trifles and read the
following lesson for the day.

          THE TWO STREAMS.

     Behold the rocky wall
     That down its sloping sides
     Pours the swift rain-drops, blending, as they fall,
     In rushing river-tides!

     Yon stream, whose sources run
     Turned by a pebble's edge,
     Is Athabasca, rolling toward the sun
     Through the cleft mountain-ledge.

     The slender rill had strayed,
     But for the slanting stone,
     To evening's ocean, with the tangled braid
     Of foam-flecked Oregon.

     So from the heights of Will
     Life's parting stream descends,
     And, as a moment turns its slender rill,
     Each widening torrent bends,

     From the same cradle's side,
     From the same mother's knee,
     --One to long darkness and the frozen tide,
     One to the Peaceful Sea!




VII

Our landlady's daughter is a young lady of some pretensions to gentility.
She wears her bonnet well back on her head, which is known by all to be a
mark of high breeding.  She wears her trains very long, as the great
ladies do in Europe.  To be sure, their dresses are so made only to sweep
the tapestried floors of chateaux and palaces; as those odious
aristocrats of the other side do not go draggling through the mud in
silks and satins, but, forsooth, must ride in coaches when they are in
full dress.  It is true, that, considering various habits of the American
people, also the little accidents which the best-kept sidewalks are
liable to, a lady who has swept a mile of them is not exactly in such a
condition that one would care to be her neighbor.  But then there is no
need of being so hard on these slight weaknesses of the poor, dear women
as our little deformed gentleman was the other day.

--There are no such women as the Boston women, Sir,--he said. Forty-two
degrees, north latitude, Rome, Sir, Boston, Sir!  They had grand women in
old Rome, Sir,--and the women bore such men--children as never the world
saw before.  And so it was here, Sir.  I tell you, the revolution the
Boston boys started had to run in woman's milk before it ran in man's
blood, Sir!

But confound the make-believe women we have turned loose in our
streets!--where do they come from?  Not out of Boston parlors, I trust.
Why, there is n't a beast or a bird that would drag its tail through the
dirt in the way these creatures do their dresses. Because a queen or a
duchess wears long robes on great occasions, a maid-of-all-work or a
factory-girl thinks she must make herself a nuisance by trailing through
the street, picking up and carrying about with her pah!--that's what I
call getting vulgarity into your bones and marrow.  Making believe be
what you are not is the essence of vulgarity.  Show over dirt is the one
attribute of vulgar people. If any man can walk behind one of these women
and see what she rakes up as she goes, and not feel squeamish, he has got
a tough stomach. I wouldn't let one of 'em into my room without serving
'em as David served Saul at the cave in the wilderness,--cut off his
skirts, Sir! cut off his skirts!

I suggested, that I had seen some pretty stylish ladies who offended in
the way he condemned.

Stylish women, I don't doubt,--said the Little Gentleman.--Don't tell me
that a true lady ever sacrifices the duty of keeping all about her sweet
and clean to the wish of making a vulgar show.  I won't believe it of a
lady.  There are some things that no fashion has any right to touch, and
cleanliness is one of those things.  If a woman wishes to show that her
husband or her father has got money, which she wants and means to spend,
but doesn't know how, let her buy a yard or two of silk and pin it to her
dress when she goes out to walk, but let her unpin it before she goes
into the house;--there may be poor women that will think it worth
disinfecting.  It is an insult to a respectable laundress to carry such
things into a house for her to deal with.  I don't like the Bloomers any
too well,--in fact, I never saw but one, and she--or he, or it--had a mob
of boys after her, or whatever you call the creature, as if she had been
a-----

The Little Gentleman stopped short,--flushed somewhat, and looked round
with that involuntary, suspicious glance which the subjects of any bodily
misfortune are very apt to cast round them.  His eye wandered over the
company, none of whom, excepting myself and one other, had, probably,
noticed the movement.  They fell at last on Iris,--his next neighbor, you
remember.

--We know in a moment, on looking suddenly at a person, if that person's
eyes have been fixed on us.

Sometimes we are conscious of it before we turn so as to see the person.
Strange secrets of curiosity, of impertinence, of malice, of love, leak
out in this way.  There is no need of Mrs. Felix Lorraine's reflection in
the mirror, to tell us that she is plotting evil for us behind our backs.
We know it, as we know by the ominous stillness of a child that some
mischief or other is going-on.  A young girl betrays, in a moment, that
her eyes have been feeding on the face where you find them fixed, and
not merely brushing over it with their pencils of blue or brown light.

A certain involuntary adjustment assimilates us, you may also observe, to
that upon which we look.  Roses redden the cheeks of her who stoops to
gather them, and buttercups turn little people's chins yellow.  When we
look at a vast landscape, our chests expand as if we would enlarge to
fill it.  When we examine a minute object, we naturally contract, not
only our foreheads, but all our dimensions. If I see two men wrestling, I
wrestle too, with my limbs and features.  When a country-fellow comes
upon the stage, you will see twenty faces in the boxes putting on the
bumpkin expression.  There is no need of multiplying instances to reach
this generalization; every person and thing we look upon puts its special
mark upon us. If this is repeated often enough, we get a permanent
resemblance to it, or, at least, a fixed aspect which we took from it.
Husband and wife come to look alike at last, as has often been noticed.
It is a common saying of a jockey, that he is "all horse"; and I have
often fancied that milkmen get a stiff, upright carriage, and an angular
movement of the arm, that remind one of a pump and the working of its
handle.

All this came in by accident, just because I happened to mention that the
Little Gentleman found that Iris had been looking at him with her soul in
her eyes, when his glance rested on her after wandering round the
company.  What he thought, it is hard to say; but the shadow of suspicion
faded off from his face, and he looked calmly into the amber eyes,
resting his cheek upon the hand that wore the red jewel.

--If it were a possible thing,--women are such strange creatures! Is
there any trick that love and their own fancies do not play them? Just
see how they marry!  A woman that gets hold of a bit of manhood is like
one of those Chinese wood-carvers who work on any odd, fantastic root
that comes to hand, and, if it is only bulbous above and bifurcated
below, will always contrive to make a man--such as he is--out of it.  I
should like to see any kind of a man, distinguishable from a Gorilla,
that some good and even pretty woman could not shape a husband out of.

--A child,--yes, if you choose to call her so, but such a child!  Do you
know how Art brings all ages together?  There is no age to the angels and
ideal human forms among which the artist lives, and he shares their youth
until his hand trembles and his eye grows dim. The youthful painter talks
of white-bearded Leonardo as if he were a brother, and the veteran
forgets that Raphael died at an age to which his own is of patriarchal
antiquity.

But why this lover of the beautiful should be so drawn to one whom Nature
has wronged so deeply seems hard to explain.  Pity, I suppose.  They say
that leads to love.

--I thought this matter over until I became excited and curious, and
determined to set myself more seriously at work to find out what was
going on in these wild hearts and where their passionate lives were
drifting.  I say wild hearts and passionate lives, because I think I can
look through this seeming calmness of youth and this apparent feebleness
of organization, and see that Nature, whom it is very hard to cheat, is
only waiting as the sapper waits in his mine, knowing that all is in
readiness and the slow-match burning quietly down to the powder.  He will
leave it by-and-by, and then it will take care of itself.

One need not wait to see the smoke coming through the roof of a house and
the flames breaking out of the windows to know that the building is on
fire.  Hark!  There is a quiet, steady, unobtrusive, crisp, not loud, but
very knowing little creeping crackle that is tolerably intelligible.
There is a whiff of something floating about, suggestive of toasting
shingles.  Also a sharp pyroligneous-acid pungency in the air that stings
one's eyes.  Let us get up and see what is going on.--Oh,--oh,--oh! do
you know what has got hold of you?  It is the great red dragon that is
born of the little red eggs we call sparks, with his hundred blowing red
manes, and his thousand lashing red tails, and his multitudinous red eyes
glaring at every crack and key-hole, and his countless red tongues
lapping the beams he is going to crunch presently, and his hot breath
warping the panels and cracking the glass and making old timber sweat
that had forgotten it was ever alive with sap.  Run for your life! leap!
or you will be a cinder in five minutes, that nothing but a coroner would
take for the wreck of a human being!

If any gentleman will have the kindness to stop this run-away comparison,
I shall be much obliged to him.  All I intended to say was, that we need
not wait for hearts to break out in flames to know that they are full of
combustibles and that a spark has got among them.  I don't pretend to say
or know what it is that brings these two persons together;--and when I
say together, I only mean that there is an evident affinity of some kind
or other which makes their commonest intercourse strangely significant,
as that each seems to understand a look or a word of the other.  When the
young girl laid her hand on the Little Gentleman's arm,--which so greatly
shocked the Model, you may remember,--I saw that she had learned the
lion-tamer's secret.  She masters him, and yet I can see she has a kind
of awe of him, as the man who goes into the cage has of the monster that
he makes a baby of.

One of two things must happen.  The first is love, downright love, on the
part of this young girl, for the poor little misshapen man. You may
laugh, if you like.  But women are apt to love the men who they think
have the largest capacity of loving;--and who can love like one that has
thirsted all his life long for the smile of youth and beauty, and seen it
fly his presence as the wave ebbed from the parched lips of him whose
fabled punishment is the perpetual type of human longing and
disappointment?  What would become of him, if this fresh soul should
stoop upon him in her first young passion, as the flamingo drops out of
the sky upon some lonely and dark lagoon in the marshes of Cagliari, with
a flutter of scarlet feathers and a kindling of strange fires in the
shadowy waters that hold her burning image?

--Marry her, of course?--Why, no, not of course.  I should think the
chance less, on the whole, that he would be willing to marry her than she
to marry him.

There is one other thing that might happen.  If the interest he awakes in
her gets to be a deep one, and yet has nothing of love in it, she will
glance off from him into some great passion or other. All excitements run
to love in women of a certain--let us not say age, but youth.  An
electrical current passing through a coil of wire makes a magnet of a bar
of iron lying within it, but not touching it.  So a woman is turned into
a love-magnet by a tingling current of life running round her.  I should
like to see one of them balanced on a pivot properly adjusted, and watch
if she did not turn so as to point north and south,--as she would, if the
love-currents are like those of the earth our mother.

Pray, do you happen to remember Wordsworth's "Boy of Windermere"? This
boy used to put his hands to his mouth, and shout aloud, mimicking the
hooting of the owls, who would answer him

               "with quivering peals,
     And long halloos and screams, and echoes loud
     Redoubled and redoubled."

When they failed to answer him, and he hung listening intently for their
voices, he would sometimes catch the faint sound of far distant
waterfalls, or the whole scene around him would imprint itself with new
force upon his perceptions.--Read the sonnet, if you please;--it is
Wordsworth all over,--trivial in subject, solemn in style, vivid in
description, prolix in detail, true metaphysically, but immensely
suggestive of "imagination," to use a mild term, when related as an
actual fact of a sprightly youngster. All I want of it is to enforce the
principle, that, when the door of the soul is once opened to a guest,
there is no knowing who will come in next.

--Our young girl keeps up her early habit of sketching heads and
characters.  Nobody is, I should think, more faithful and exact in the
drawing of the academical figures given her as lessons, but there is a
perpetual arabesque of fancies that runs round the margin of her
drawings, and there is one book which I know she keeps to run riot in,
where, if anywhere, a shrewd eye would be most likely to read her
thoughts.  This book of hers I mean to see, if I can get at it honorably.

I have never yet crossed the threshold of the Little Gentleman's chamber.
How he lives, when he once gets within it, I can only guess.  His hours
are late, as I have said; often, on waking late in the night, I see the
light through cracks in his window-shutters on the wall of the house
opposite.  If the times of witchcraft were not over, I should be afraid
to be so close a neighbor to a place from which there come such strange
noises.  Sometimes it is the dragging of something heavy over the floor,
that makes me shiver to hear it,--it sounds so like what people that
kill other people have to do now and then.  Occasionally I hear very
sweet strains of music,--whether of a wind or stringed instrument, or a
human voice, strange as it may seem, I have often tried to find out, but
through the partition I could not be quite sure.  If I have not heard a
woman cry and moan, and then again laugh as though she would die
laughing, I have heard sounds so like them that--I am a fool to confess
it--I have covered my head with the bedclothes; for I have had a fancy in
my dreams, that I could hardly shake off when I woke up, about that
so-called witch that was his great-grandmother, or whatever it was,--a
sort of fancy that she visited the Little Gentleman,--a young woman in
old-fashioned dress, with a red ring round her white neck,--not a
neck-lace, but a dull-stain.

Of course you don't suppose that I have any foolish superstitions about
the matter,--I, the Professor, who have seen enough to take all that
nonsense out of any man's head!  It is not our beliefs that frighten us
half so much as our fancies.  A man not only believes, but knows he runs
a risk, whenever he steps into a railroad car; but it does n't worry him
much.  On the other hand, carry that man across a pasture a little way
from some dreary country-village, and show him an old house where there
were strange deaths a good many years ago, and there are rumors of ugly
spots on the walls,--the old man hung himself in the garret, that is
certain, and ever since the country-people have called it "the haunted
house,"--the owners have n't been able to let it since the last tenants
left on account of the noises,--so it has fallen into sad decay, and the
moss grows on the rotten shingles of the roof, and the clapboards have
turned black, and the windows rattle like teeth that chatter with fear,
and the walls of the house begin to lean as if its knees were shaking,
--take the man who did n't mind the real risk of the cars to that old
house, on some dreary November evening, and ask him to sleep there
alone,--how do you think he will like it?  He doesn't believe one word of
ghosts,--but then he knows, that, whether waking or sleeping, his
imagination will people the haunted chambers with ghostly images.  It is
not what we believe, as I said before, that frightens us commonly, but
what we conceive.  A principle that reaches a good way if I am not
mistaken.  I say, then, that, if these odd sounds coming from the Little
Gentleman's chamber sometimes make me nervous, so that I cannot get to
sleep, it is not because I suppose he is engaged in any unlawful or
mysterious way. The only wicked suggestion that ever came into my head
was one that was founded on the landlady's story of his having a pile of
gold; it was a ridiculous fancy; besides, I suspect the story of sweating
gold was only one of the many fables got up to make the Jews odious and
afford a pretext for plundering them.  As for the sound like a woman
laughing and crying, I never said it was a woman's voice; for, in the
first place, I could only hear indistinctly; and, secondly, he may have
an organ, or some queer instrument or other, with what they call the vox
humana stop.  If he moves his bed round to get away from the window, or
for any such reason, there is nothing very frightful in that simple
operation.  Most of our foolish conceits explain themselves in some such
simple way.  And, yet, for all that, I confess, that, when I woke up the
other evening, and heard, first a sweet complaining cry, and then
footsteps, and then the dragging sound,--nothing but his bed, I am quite
sure,--I felt a stirring in the roots of my hair as the feasters did in
Keats's terrible poem of "Lamia."

There is nothing very odd in my feeling nervous when I happen to lie
awake and get listening for sounds.  Just keep your ears open any time
after midnight, when you are lying in bed in a lone attic of a dark
night.  What horrid, strange, suggestive, unaccountable noises you will
hear!  The stillness of night is a vulgar error.  All the dead things
seem to be alive.  Crack!  That is the old chest of drawers; you never
hear it crack in the daytime.  Creak!  There's a door ajar; you know you
shut them all.

Where can that latch be that rattles so?  Is anybody trying it softly?
or, worse than any body, is----?  (Cold shiver.) Then a sudden gust that
jars all the windows;--very strange!--there does not seem to be any wind
about that it belongs to.  When it stops, you hear the worms boring in
the powdery beams overhead.  Then steps outside,--a stray animal, no
doubt.  All right,--but a gentle moisture breaks out all over you; and
then something like a whistle or a cry,--another gust of wind, perhaps;
that accounts for the rustling that just made your heart roll over and
tumble about, so that it felt more like a live rat under your ribs than a
part of your own body; then a crash of something that has fallen,--blown
over, very likely----Pater noster, qui es in coelis! for you are damp and
cold, and sitting bolt upright, and the bed trembling so that the
death-watch is frightened and has stopped ticking!

No,--night is an awful time for strange noises and secret doings. Who
ever dreamed, till one of our sleepless neighbors told us of it, of that
Walpurgis gathering of birds and beasts of prey,--foxes, and owls, and
crows, and eagles, that come from all the country round on moonshiny
nights to crunch the clams and muscles, and pick out the eyes of dead
fishes that the storm has thrown on Chelsea Beach?  Our old mother Nature
has pleasant and cheery tones enough for us when she comes in her dress
of blue and gold over the eastern hill-tops; but when she follows us
up-stairs to our beds in her suit of black velvet and diamonds, every
creak of her sandals and every whisper of her lips is full of mystery and
fear.

You understand, then, distinctly, that I do not believe there is anything
about this singular little neighbor of mine which is as it should not be.
Probably a visit to his room would clear up all that has puzzled me, and
make me laugh at the notions which began, I suppose, in nightmares, and
ended by keeping my imagination at work so as almost to make me
uncomfortable at times.  But it is not so easy to visit him as some of
our other boarders, for various reasons which I will not stop to mention.
I think some of them are rather pleased to get "the Professor" under
their ceilings.

The young man John, for instance, asked me to come up one day and try
some "old Burbon," which he said was A 1.  On asking him what was the
number of his room, he answered, that it was forty-'leven, sky-parlor
floor, but that I shouldn't find it, if he did n't go ahead to show me
the way.  I followed him to his habitat, being very willing to see in
what kind of warren he burrowed, and thinking I might pick up something
about the boarders who had excited my curiosity.

Mighty close quarters they were where the young man John bestowed himself
and his furniture; this last consisting of a bed, a chair, a bureau, a
trunk, and numerous pegs with coats and "pants" and "vests,"--as he was
in the habit of calling waist-coats and pantaloons or trousers,--hanging
up as if the owner had melted out of them.  Several prints were pinned up
unframed,--among them that grand national portrait-piece, "Barnum
presenting Ossian E. Dodge to Jenny Lind," and a picture of a famous
trot, in which I admired anew the cabalistic air of that imposing array
of expressions, and especially the Italicized word, "Dan Mace names b. h.
Major Slocum," and "Hiram Woodruff names g. m. Lady Smith."  "Best three
in five. Time: 2.40, 2.46, 2.50."

That set me thinking how very odd this matter of trotting horses is, as
an index of the mathematical exactness of the laws of living mechanism.
I saw Lady Suffolk trot a mile in 2.26.  Flora Temple has trotted close
down to 2.20; and Ethan Allen in 2.25, or less. Many horses have trotted
their mile under 2.30; none that I remember in public as low down as
2.20.  From five to ten seconds, then, in about a hundred and sixty is
the whole range of the maxima of the present race of trotting horses.
The same thing is seen in the running of men.  Many can run a mile in
five minutes; but when one comes to the fractions below, they taper down
until somewhere about 4.30 the maximum is reached.  Averages of masses
have been studied more than averages of maxima and minima.  We know from
the Registrar-General's Reports, that a certain number of children--say
from one to two dozen--die every year in England from drinking hot water
out of spouts of teakettles.  We know, that, among suicides, women and
men past a certain age almost never use fire-arms.  A woman who has made
up her mind to die is still afraid of a pistol or a gun.  Or is it that
the explosion would derange her costume?

I say, averages of masses we have, but our tables of maxima we owe to the
sporting men more than to the philosophers.  The lesson their experience
teaches is, that Nature makes no leaps,--does nothing per saltum.  The
greatest brain that ever lived, no doubt, was only a small fraction of an
idea ahead of the second best.  Just look at the chess-players.  Leaving
out the phenomenal exceptions, the nice shades that separate the skilful
ones show how closely their brains approximate,--almost as closely as
chronometers.  Such a person is a "knight-player,"--he must have that
piece given him.  Another must have two pawns.  Another, "pawn and two,"
or one pawn and two moves. Then we find one who claims "pawn and move,"
holding himself, with this fractional advantage, a match for one who
would be pretty sure to beat him playing even.--So much are minds alike;
and you and I think we are "peculiar,"--that Nature broke her jelly-mould
after shaping our cerebral convolutions.  So I reflected, standing and
looking at the picture.

--I say, Governor,--broke in the young man John,--them bosses '11 stay
jest as well, if you'll only set down.  I've had 'em this year, and they
haven't stirred.--He spoke, and handed the chair towards me,--seating
himself, at the same time, on the end of the bed.

You have lived in this house some time?--I said,--with a note of
interrogation at the end of the statement.

Do I look as if I'd lost much flesh--said he, answering my question by
another.

No,--said I;--for that matter, I think you do credit to "the bountifully
furnished table of the excellent lady who provides so liberally for the
company that meets around her hospitable board."

[The sentence in quotation-marks was from one of those disinterested
editorials in small type, which I suspect to have been furnished by a
friend of the landlady's, and paid for as an advertisement.  This
impartial testimony to the superior qualities of the establishment and
its head attracted a number of applicants for admission, and a couple of
new boarders made a brief appearance at the table.  One of them was of
the class of people who grumble if they don't get canvas-backs and
woodcocks every day, for three-fifty per week.  The other was subject to
somnambulism, or walking in the night, when he ought to have been asleep
in his bed.  In this state he walked into several of the boarders'
chambers, his eyes wide open, as is usual with somnambulists, and, from
some odd instinct or other, wishing to know what the hour was, got
together a number of their watches, for the purpose of comparing them, as
it would seem.  Among them was a repeater, belonging to our young
Marylander.  He happened to wake up while the somnambulist was in his
chamber, and, not knowing his infirmity, caught hold of him and gave him
a dreadful shaking, after which he tied his hands and feet, and so left
him till morning, when he introduced him to a gentleman used to taking
care of such cases of somnambulism.]

If you, my reader, will please to skip backward, over this parenthesis,
you will come to our conversation, which it has interrupted.

It a'n't the feed,--said the young man John,--it's the old woman's looks
when a fellah lays it in too strong.  The feed's well enough. After geese
have got tough, 'n' turkeys have got strong, 'n' lamb's got old, 'n'
veal's pretty nigh beef, 'n' sparragrass 's growin' tall 'n' slim 'n'
scattery about the head, 'n' green peas are gettin' so big 'n' hard
they'd be dangerous if you fired 'em out of a revolver, we get hold of
all them delicacies of the season.  But it's too much like feedin' on
live folks and devourin' widdah's substance, to lay yourself out in the
eatin' way, when a fellah 's as hungry as the chap that said a turkey was
too much for one 'n' not enough for two.  I can't help lookin' at the old
woman.  Corned-beef-days she's tolerable calm.  Roastin'-days she worries
some, 'n' keeps a sharp eye on the chap that carves.  But when there's
anything in the poultry line, it seems to hurt her feelin's so to see the
knife goin' into the breast and joints comin' to pieces, that there's no
comfort in eatin'.  When I cut up an old fowl and help the boarders, I
always feel as if I ought to say, Won't you have a slice of
widdah?--instead of chicken.

The young man John fell into a train of reflections which ended in his
producing a Bologna sausage, a plate of "crackers," as we Boston folks
call certain biscuits, and the bottle of whiskey described as being A 1.

Under the influence of the crackers and sausage, he grew cordial and
communicative.

It was time, I thought, to sound him as to those of our boarders who had
excited my curiosity.

What do you think of our young Iris?--I began.

Fust-rate little filly;-he said.--Pootiest and nicest little chap I've
seen since the schoolma'am left.  Schoolma'am was a brown-haired
one,--eyes coffee-color.  This one has got wine-colored eyes,--'n' that
's the reason they turn a fellah's head, I suppose.

This is a splendid blonde,--I said,--the other was a brunette. Which
style do you like best?

Which do I like best, boiled mutton or roast mutton?--said the young man
John.  Like 'em both,--it a'n't the color of 'em makes the goodness.  I
've been kind of lonely since schoolma'am went away. Used to like to look
at her.  I never said anything particular to her, that I remember, but--

I don't know whether it was the cracker and sausage, or that the young
fellow's feet were treading on the hot ashes of some longing that had not
had time to cool, but his eye glistened as he stopped.

I suppose she wouldn't have looked at a fellah like me,--he said,--but I
come pretty near tryin'.  If she had said, Yes, though, I shouldn't have
known what to have done with her.  Can't marry a woman now-a-days till
you're so deaf you have to cock your head like a parrot to hear what she
says, and so longsighted you can't see what she looks like nearer than
arm's-length.

Here is another chance for you,--I said.--What do you want nicer than
such a young lady as Iris?

It's no use,--he answered.--I look at them girls and feel as the fellah
did when he missed catchin' the trout.--'To'od 'a' cost more butter to
cook him 'n' he's worth,--says the fellah.--Takes a whole piece o' goods
to cover a girl up now-a-days.  I'd as lief undertake to keep a span of
elephants,--and take an ostrich to board, too,--as to marry one of 'em.
What's the use?  Clerks and counter-jumpers ain't anything.  Sparragrass
and green peas a'n't for them,--not while they're young and tender.
Hossback-ridin' a'n't for them,--except once a year, on Fast-day.  And
marryin' a'n't for them. Sometimes a fellah feels lonely, and would like
to have a nice young woman, to tell her how lonely he feels.  And
sometimes a fellah,--here the young man John looked very confidential,
and, perhaps, as if a little ashamed of his weakness,--sometimes a fellah
would like to have one o' them small young ones to trot on his knee and
push about in a little wagon,--a kind of a little Johnny, you know;--it's
odd enough, but, it seems to me, nobody can afford them little articles,
except the folks that are so rich they can buy everything, and the folks
that are so poor they don't want anything.  It makes nice boys of us
young fellahs, no doubt!  And it's pleasant to see fine young girls
sittin', like shopkeepers behind their goods, waitin', and waitin', and
waitin', 'n' no customers,--and the men lingerin' round and lookin' at
the goods, like folks that want to be customers, but have n't the money!

Do you think the deformed gentleman means to make love to Iris?--I said.

What!  Little Boston ask that girl to marry him!  Well, now, that's
cumin' of it a little too strong.  Yes, I guess she will marry him and
carry him round in a basket, like a lame bantam: Look here!--he said,
mysteriously;--one of the boarders swears there's a woman comes to see
him, and that he has heard her singin' and screechin'. I should like to
know what he's about in that den of his.  He lays low 'n' keeps
dark,--and, I tell you, there's a good many of the boarders would like to
get into his chamber, but he don't seem to want 'em.  Biddy could tell
somethin' about what she's seen when she 's been to put his room to
rights.  She's a Paddy 'n' a fool, but she knows enough to keep her
tongue still.  All I know is, I saw her crossin' herself one day when she
came out of that room.  She looked pale enough, 'n' I heard her mutterin'
somethin' or other about the Blessed Virgin.  If it had n't been for the
double doors to that chamber of his, I'd have had a squint inside before
this; but, somehow or other, it never seems to happen that they're both
open at once.

What do you think he employs himself about? said I.

The young man John winked.

I waited patiently for the thought, of which this wink was the blossom,
to come to fruit in words.

I don't believe in witches,--said the young man John.

Nor I.

We were both silent for a few minutes.

--Did you ever see the young girl's drawing-books,--I said, presently.

All but one,--he answered;--she keeps a lock on that, and won't show it.
Ma'am Allen, (the young rogue sticks to that name, in speaking of the
gentleman with the diamond,) Ma'am Allen tried to peek into it one day
when she left it on the sideboard.  "If you please," says she,--'n' took
it from him, 'n' gave him a look that made him curl up like a caterpillar
on a hot shovel.  I only wished he had n't, and had jest given her a
little sass, for I've been takin' boxin'-lessons, 'n' I 've got a new way
of counterin' I want to try on to somebody.

--The end of all this was, that I came away from the young fellow's room,
feeling that there were two principal things that I had to live for, for
the next six weeks or six months, if it should take so long.  These were,
to get a sight of the young girl's drawing-book, which I suspected had
her heart shut up in it, and to get a look into the Little Gentleman's
room.

I don't doubt you think it rather absurd that I should trouble myself
about these matters.  You tell me, with some show of reason, that all I
shall find in the young girl's--book will be some outlines of angels with
immense eyes, traceries of flowers, rural sketches, and caricatures,
among which I shall probably have the pleasure of seeing my own features
figuring.  Very likely.  But I'll tell you what I think I shall find.  If
this child has idealized the strange little bit of humanity over which
she seems to have spread her wings like a brooding dove,--if, in one of
those wild vagaries that passionate natures are so liable to, she has
fairly sprung upon him with her clasping nature, as the sea-flowers fold
about the first stray shell-fish that brushes their outspread tentacles,
depend upon it, I shall find the marks of it in this drawing-book of
hers,--if I can ever get a look at it,--fairly, of course, for I would
not play tricks to satisfy my curiosity.

Then, if I can get into this Little Gentleman's room under any fair
pretext, I shall, no doubt, satisfy myself in five minutes that he is
just like other people, and that there is no particular mystery about
him.

The night after my visit to the young man John, I made all these and many
more reflections.  It was about two o'clock in the morning,--bright
starlight,--so light that I could make out the time on my
alarm-clock,--when I woke up trembling and very moist.  It was the heavy
dragging sound, as I had often heard it before that waked me. Presently a
window was softly closed.  I had just begun to get over the agitation
with which we always awake from nightmare dreams, when I heard the sound
which seemed to me as of a woman's voice,--the clearest, purest soprano
which one could well conceive of.  It was not loud, and I could not
distinguish a word, if it was a woman's voice; but there were recurring
phrases of sound and snatches of rhythm that reached me, which suggested
the idea of complaint, and sometimes, I thought, of passionate grief and
despair.  It died away at last,--and then I heard the opening of a door,
followed by a low, monotonous sound, as of one talking,--and then the
closing of a door,--and presently the light on the opposite wall
disappeared and all was still for the night.

By George! this gets interesting,--I said, as I got out of bed for a
change of night-clothes.

I had this in my pocket the other day, but thought I would n't read
it at our celebration.  So I read it to the boarders instead, and
print it to finish off this record with.


               ROBINSON OF LEYDEN.

     He sleeps not here; in hope and prayer
     His wandering flock had gone before,
     But he, the shepherd, might not share
     Their sorrows on the wintry shore.

     Before the Speedwell's anchor swung,
     Ere yet the Mayflower's sail was spread,
     While round his feet the Pilgrims clung,
     The pastor spake, and thus he said:--

     "Men, brethren, sisters, children dear!
     God calls you hence from over sea;
     Ye may not build by Haerlem Meer,
     Nor yet along the Zuyder-Zee.

     "Ye go to bear the saving word
     To tribes unnamed and shores untrod:
     Heed well the lessons ye have heard
     From those old teachers taught of God.

     "Yet think not unto them was lent
     All light for all the coming days,
     And Heaven's eternal wisdom spent
     In making straight the ancient ways.

     "The living fountain overflows
     For every flock, for every lamb,
     Nor heeds, though angry creeds oppose
     With Luther's dike or Calvin's dam."

     He spake; with lingering, long embrace,
     With tears of love and partings fond,
     They floated down the creeping Maas,
     Along the isle of Ysselmond.

     They passed the frowning towers of Briel,
     The "Hook of Holland's" shelf of sand,
     And grated soon with lifting keel
     The sullen shores of Fatherland.

     No home for these!--too well they knew
     The mitred king behind the throne;
     The sails were set, the pennons flew,
     And westward ho! for worlds unknown.

     --And these were they who gave us birth,
     The Pilgrims of the sunset wave,
     Who won for us this virgin earth,
     And freedom with the soil they gave.

     The pastor slumbers by the Rhine,
     --In alien earth the exiles lie,
     --Their nameless graves our holiest shrine,
     His words our noblest battle-cry!

     Still cry them, and the world shall hear,
     Ye dwellers by the storm-swept sea!
     Ye have not built by Haerlem Meer,
     Nor on the land-locked Zuyder-Zee!




VIII

There has been a sort of stillness in the atmosphere of our
boarding-house since my last record, as if something or other were going
on.  There is no particular change that I can think of in the aspect of
things; yet I have a feeling as if some game of life were quietly playing
and strange forces were at work, underneath this smooth surface of
every-day boardinghouse life, which would show themselves some fine
morning or other in events, if not in catastrophes.  I have been
watchful, as I said I should be, but have little to tell as yet.  You may
laugh at me, and very likely think me foolishly fanciful to trouble
myself about what is going on in a middling-class household like ours.
Do as you like.  But here is that terrible fact to begin with,--a
beautiful young girl, with the blood and the nerve-fibre that belong to
Nature's women, turned loose among live men.

-Terrible fact?

Very terrible.  Nothing more so.  Do you forget the angels who lost
heaven for the daughters of men?  Do you forget Helen, and the fair women
who made mischief and set nations by the ears before Helen was born?  If
jealousies that gnaw men's hearts out of their bodies,--if pangs that
waste men to shadows and drive them into raving madness or moping
melancholy,--if assassination and suicide are dreadful possibilities,
then there is always something frightful about a lovely young woman.--I
love to look at this "Rainbow," as her father used sometimes to call her,
of ours.  Handsome creature that she is in forms and colors,--the very
picture, as it seems to me, of that "golden blonde" my friend whose book
you read last year fell in love with when he was a boy, (as you remember,
no doubt,)--handsome as she is, fit for a sea-king's bride, it is not her
beauty alone that holds my eyes upon her.  Let me tell you one of my
fancies, and then you will understand the strange sort of fascination she
has for me.

It is in the hearts of many men and women--let me add children--that
there is a Great Secret waiting for them,--a secret of which they get
hints now and then, perhaps oftener in early than in later years.  These
hints come sometimes in dreams, sometimes in sudden startling
flashes,--second wakings, as it were,--a waking out of the waking state,
which last is very apt to be a half-sleep.  I have many times stopped
short and held my breath, and felt the blood leaving my cheeks, in one of
these sudden clairvoyant flashes.  Of course I cannot tell what kind of a
secret this is, but I think of it as a disclosure of certain relations of
our personal being to time and space, to other intelligences, to the
procession of events, and to their First Great Cause.  This secret seems
to be broken up, as it were, into fragments, so that we find here a word
and there a syllable, and then again only a letter of it; but it never is
written out for most of us as a complete sentence, in this life.  I do
not think it could be; for I am disposed to consider our beliefs about
such a possible disclosure rather as a kind of premonition of an
enlargement of our faculties in some future state than as an expectation
to be fulfilled for most of us in this life.  Persons, however, have
fallen into trances,--as did the Reverend William Tennent, among many
others,--and learned some things which they could not tell in our human
words.

Now among the visible objects which hint to us fragments of this infinite
secret for which our souls are waiting, the faces of women are those that
carry the most legible hieroglyphics of the great mystery.  There are
women's faces, some real, some ideal, which contain something in them
that becomes a positive element in our creed, so direct and palpable a
revelation is it of the infinite purity and love.  I remember two faces
of women with wings, such as they call angels, of Fra Angelico,--and I
just now came across a print of Raphael's Santa Apollina, with something
of the same quality,--which I was sure had their prototypes in the world
above ours.  No wonder the Catholics pay their vows to the Queen of
Heaven!  The unpoetical side of Protestantism is, that it has no women to
be worshipped.

But mind you, it is not every beautiful face that hints the Great Secret
to us, nor is it only in beautiful faces that we find traces of it.
Sometimes it looks out from a sweet sad eye, the only beauty of a plain
countenance; sometimes there is so much meaning in the lips of a woman,
not otherwise fascinating, that we know they have a message for us, and
wait almost with awe to hear their accents.  But this young girl has at
once the beauty of feature and the unspoken mystery of expression.  Can
she tell me anything?

Is her life a complement of mine, with the missing element in it which I
have been groping after through so many friendships that I have tired of,
and through--Hush!  Is the door fast?  Talking loud is a bad trick in
these curious boarding-houses.

You must have sometimes noted this fact that I am going to remind you of
and to use for a special illustration.  Riding along over a rocky road,
suddenly the slow monotonous grinding of the crushing gravel changes to a
deep heavy rumble.  There is a great hollow under your feet,--a huge
unsunned cavern.  Deep, deep beneath you in the core of the living rock,
it arches its awful vault, and far away it stretches its winding
galleries, their roofs dripping into streams where fishes have been
swimming and spawning in the dark until their scales are white as milk
and their eyes have withered out, obsolete and useless.

So it is in life.  We jog quietly along, meeting the same faces, grinding
over the same thoughts, the gravel of the soul's highway,--now and then
jarred against an obstacle we cannot crush, but must ride over or round
as we best may, sometimes bringing short up against a disappointment, but
still working along with the creaking and rattling and grating and
jerking that belong to the journey of life, even in the smoothest-rolling
vehicle.  Suddenly we hear the deep underground reverberation that
reveals the unsuspected depth of some abyss of thought or passion beneath
us.

I wish the girl would go.  I don't like to look at her so much, and yet I
cannot help it.  Always that same expression of something that I ought to
know,--something that she was made to tell and I to hear,--lying there
ready to fall off from her lips, ready to leap out of her eyes and make a
saint of me, or a devil or a lunatic, or perhaps a prophet to tell the
truth and be hated of men, or a poet whose words shall flash upon the dry
stubble-field of worn-out thoughts and burn over an age of lies in an
hour of passion.

It suddenly occurs to me that I may have put you on the wrong track. The
Great Secret that I refer to has nothing to do with the Three Words.  Set
your mind at ease about that,--there are reasons I could give you which
settle all that matter.  I don't wonder, however, that you confounded the
Great Secret with the Three Words.

I LOVE YOU is all the secret that many, nay, most women have to tell.
When that is said, they are like China-crackers on the morning of the
fifth of July.  And just as that little patriotic implement is made with
a slender train which leads to the magazine in its interior, so a sharp
eye can almost always see the train leading from a young girl's eye or
lip to the "I love you" in her heart.  But the Three Words are not the
Great Secret I mean.  No, women's faces are only one of the tablets on
which that is written in its partial, fragmentary symbols.  It lies
deeper than Love, though very probably Love is a part of it.  Some, I
think,--Wordsworth might be one of them,--spell out a portion of it from
certain beautiful natural objects, landscapes, flowers, and others. I can
mention several poems of his that have shadowy hints which seem to me to
come near the region where I think it lies.  I have known two persons who
pursued it with the passion of the old alchemists,--all wrong evidently,
but infatuated, and never giving up the daily search for it until they
got tremulous and feeble, and their dreams changed to visions of things
that ran and crawled about their floor and ceilings, and so they died.
The vulgar called them drunkards.

I told you that I would let you know the mystery of the effect this young
girl's face produces on me.  It is akin to those influences a friend of
mine has described, you may remember, as coming from certain voices.  I
cannot translate it into words,--only into feelings; and these I have
attempted to shadow by showing that her face hinted that revelation of
something we are close to knowing, which all imaginative persons are
looking for either in this world or on the very threshold of the next.

You shake your head at the vagueness and fanciful incomprehensibleness of
my description of the expression in a young girl's face.  You forget what
a miserable surface-matter this language is in which we try to reproduce
our interior state of being.  Articulation is a shallow trick.  From the
light Poh! which we toss off from our lips as we fling a nameless
scribbler's impertinence into our waste-baskets, to the gravest
utterances which comes from our throats in our moments of deepest need,
is only a space of some three or four inches.  Words, which are a set of
clickings, hissings, lispings, and so on, mean very little, compared to
tones and expression of the features.  I give it up; I thought I could
shadow forth in some feeble way, by their aid, the effect this young
girl's face produces on my imagination; but it is of no use. No doubt
your head aches, trying to make something of my description.  If there is
here and there one that can make anything intelligible out of my talk
about the Great Secret, and who has spelt out a syllable or two of it on
some woman's face, dead or living, that is all I can expect.  One should
see the person with whom he converses about such matters.  There are
dreamy-eyed people to whom I should say all these things with a certainty
of being understood;--

          That moment that his face I see,
          I know the man that must hear me
          To him my tale I teach.

--I am afraid some of them have not got a spare quarter of a dollar for
this August number, so that they will never see it.

--Let us start again, just as if we had not made this ambitious attempt,
which may go for nothing, and you can have your money refunded, if you
will make the change.

This young girl, about whom I have talked so unintelligibly, is the
unconscious centre of attraction to the whole solar system of our
breakfast-table.  The Little Gentleman leans towards her, and she again
seems to be swayed as by some invisible gentle force towards him.  That
slight inclination of two persons with a strong affinity towards each
other, throwing them a little out of plumb when they sit side by side, is
a physical fact I have often noticed.  Then there is a tendency in all
the men's eyes to converge on her; and I do firmly believe, that, if all
their chairs were examined, they would be found a little obliquely
placed, so as to favor the direction in which their occupants love to
look.

That bland, quiet old gentleman, of whom I have spoken as sitting
opposite to me, is no exception to the rule.  She brought down some
mignonette one morning, which she had grown in her chamber.  She gave a
sprig to her little neighbor, and one to the landlady, and sent another
by the hand of Bridget to this old gentleman.

--Sarvant, Ma'am I Much obleeged,--he said, and put it gallantly in his
button-hole.--After breakfast he must see some of her drawings. Very fine
performances,--very fine!--truly elegant productions, truly elegant!--Had
seen Miss Linwood's needlework in London, in the year (eighteen hundred
and little or nothing, I think he said,)--patronized by the nobility and
gentry, and Her Majesty,--elegant, truly elegant productions, very fine
performances; these drawings reminded him of them;--wonderful resemblance
to Nature; an extraordinary art, painting; Mr. Copley made some very fine
pictures that he remembered seeing when he was a boy.  Used to remember
some lines about a portrait Written by Mr. Cowper, beginning,

         "Oh that those lips had language!  Life has pass'd
          With me but roughly since I heard thee last."

And with this the old gentleman fell to thinking about a dead mother of
his that he remembered ever so much younger than he now was, and looking,
not as his mother, but as his daughter should look.  The dead young
mother was looking at the old man, her child, as she used to look at him
so many, many years ago.  He stood still as if in a waking dream, his
eyes fixed on the drawings till their outlines grew indistinct and they
ran into each other, and a pale, sweet face shaped itself out of the
glimmering light through which he saw them.--What is there quite so
profoundly human as an old man's memory of a mother who died in his
earlier years?  Mother she remains till manhood, and by-and-by she grows
to be as a sister; and at last, when, wrinkled and bowed and broken, he
looks back upon her in her fair youth, he sees in the sweet image he
caresses, not his parent, but, as it were, his child.

If I had not seen all this in the old gentleman's face, the words with
which he broke his silence would have betrayed his train of thought.

--If they had only taken pictures then as they do now!--he said.--All
gone! all gone! nothing but her face as she leaned on the arms of her
great chair; and I would give a hundred pound for the poorest little
picture of her, such as you can buy for a shilling of anybody that you
don't want to see.--The old gentleman put his hand to his forehead so as
to shade his eyes.  I saw he was looking at the dim photograph of memory,
and turned from him to Iris.

How many drawing-books have you filled,--I said,--since you began to take
lessons?--This was the first,--she answered,--since she was here; and it
was not full, but there were many separate sheets of large size she had
covered with drawings.

I turned over the leaves of the book before us.  Academic studies,
principally of the human figure.  Heads of sibyls, prophets, and so
forth.  Limbs from statues.  Hands and feet from Nature.  What a superb
drawing of an arm!  I don't remember it among the figures from Michel
Angelo, which seem to have been her patterns mainly. From Nature, I
think, or after a cast from Nature.--Oh!

--Your smaller studies are in this, I suppose,--I said, taking up the
drawing-book with a lock on it,--Yes,--she said.--I should like to see
her style of working on a small scale.--There was nothing in it worth
showing,--she said; and presently I saw her try the lock, which proved to
be fast.  We are all caricatured in it, I haven't the least doubt.  I
think, though, I could tell by her way of dealing with us what her
fancies were about us boarders.  Some of them act as if they were
bewitched with her, but she does not seem to notice it much.  Her
thoughts seem to be on her little neighbor more than on anybody else.
The young fellow John appears to stand second in her good graces.  I
think he has once or twice sent her what the landlady's daughter calls
bo-kays of flowers,--somebody has, at any rate.--I saw a book she had,
which must have come from the divinity-student.  It had a dreary
title-page, which she had enlivened with a fancy portrait of the
author,--a face from memory, apparently,--one of those faces that small
children loathe without knowing why, and which give them that inward
disgust for heaven so many of the little wretches betray, when they hear
that these are "good men," and that heaven is full of such.--The
gentleman with the diamond--the Koh-i-noor, so called by us--was not
encouraged, I think, by the reception of his packet of perfumed soap.  He
pulls his purple moustache and looks appreciatingly at Iris, who never
sees him, as it should seem.  The young Marylander, who I thought would
have been in love with her before this time, sometimes looks from his
corner across the long diagonal of the table, as much as to say, I wish
you were up here by me, or I were down there by you,--which would,
perhaps, be a more natural arrangement than the present one.  But nothing
comes of all this,--and nothing has come of my sagacious idea of finding
out the girl's fancies by looking into her locked drawing-book.

Not to give up all the questions I was determined to solve, I made an
attempt also to work into the Little Gentleman's chamber.  For this
purpose, I kept him in conversation, one morning, until he was just ready
to go up-stairs, and then, as if to continue the talk, followed him as he
toiled back to his room.  He rested on the landing and faced round toward
me.  There was something in his eye which said, Stop there!  So we
finished our conversation on the landing.  The next day, I mustered
assurance enough to knock at his door, having a pretext ready.--No
answer.--Knock again.  A door, as if of a cabinet, was shut softly and
locked, and presently I heard the peculiar dead beat of his thick-soled,
misshapen boots. The bolts and the lock of the inner door were
unfastened,--with unnecessary noise, I thought,--and he came into the
passage.  He pulled the inner door after him and opened the outer one at
which I stood.  He had on a flowered silk dressing-gown, such as "Mr.
Copley" used to paint his old-fashioned merchant-princes in; and a
quaint-looking key in his hand.  Our conversation was short, but long
enough to convince me that the Little Gentleman did not want my company
in his chamber, and did not mean to have it.

I have been making a great fuss about what is no mystery at all,--a
schoolgirl's secrets and a whimsical man's habits.  I mean to give up
such nonsense and mind my own business.--Hark!  What the deuse is that
odd noise in his chamber?

--I think I am a little superstitious.  There were two things, when I was
a boy, that diabolized my imagination,--I mean, that gave me a distinct
apprehension of a formidable bodily shape which prowled round the
neighborhood where I was born and bred.  The first was a series of marks
called the "Devil's footsteps."  These were patches of sand in the
pastures, where no grass grew, where the low-bush blackberry, the
"dewberry," as our Southern neighbors call it, in prettier and more
Shakspearian language, did not spread its clinging creepers,--where even
the pale, dry, sadly-sweet "everlasting" could not grow, but all was bare
and blasted.  The second was a mark in one of the public buildings near
my home,--the college dormitory named after a Colonial Governor.  I do
not think many persons are aware of the existence of this mark,--little
having been said about the story in print, as it was considered very
desirable, for the sake of the Institution, to hush it up.  In the
northwest corner, and on the level of the third or fourth story, there
are signs of a breach in the walls, mended pretty well, but not to be
mistaken.  A considerable portion of that corner must have been carried
away, from within outward.  It was an unpleasant affair; and I do not
care to repeat the particulars; but some young men had been using sacred
things in a profane and unlawful way, when the occurrence, which was
variously explained, took place.  The story of the Appearance in the
chamber was, I suppose, invented afterwards; but of the injury to the
building there could be no question; and the zig-zag line, where the
mortar is a little thicker than before, is still distinctly visible.  The
queer burnt spots, called the "Devil's footsteps," had never attracted
attention before this time, though there is no evidence that they had not
existed previously, except that of the late Miss M., a "Goody," so
called, or sweeper, who was positive on the subject, but had a strange
horror of referring to an affair of which she was thought to know
something.--I tell you it was not so pleasant for a little boy of
impressible nature to go up to bed in an old gambrel-roofed house, with
untenanted, locked upper-chambers, and a most ghostly garret,--with the
"Devil's footsteps" in the fields behind the house and in front of it the
patched dormitory where the unexplained occurrence had taken place which
startled those godless youths at their mock devotions, so that one of
them was epileptic from that day forward, and another, after a dreadful
season of mental conflict, took holy orders and became renowned for his
ascetic sanctity.

There were other circumstances that kept up the impression produced by
these two singular facts I have just mentioned.  There was a dark
storeroom, on looking through the key-hole of which, I could dimly see a
heap of chairs and tables, and other four-footed things, which seemed to
me to have rushed in there, frightened, and in their fright to have
huddled together and climbed up on each other's backs,--as the people did
in that awful crush where so many were killed, at the execution of
Holloway and Haggerty.  Then the Lady's portrait, up-stairs, with the
sword-thrusts through it,--marks of the British officers' rapiers,--and
the tall mirror in which they used to look at their red coats,--confound
them for smashing its mate?--and the deep, cunningly wrought arm-chair in
which Lord Percy used to sit while his hair was dressing;--he was a
gentleman, and always had it covered with a large peignoir, to save the
silk covering my grandmother embroidered.  Then the little room
downstairs from which went the orders to throw up a bank of earth on the
hill yonder, where you may now observe a granite obelisk,--"the study" in
my father's time, but in those days the council-chamber of armed
men,--sometimes filled with soldiers; come with me, and I will show you
the "dents" left by the butts of their muskets all over the floor.  With
all these suggestive objects round me, aided by the wild stories those
awful country-boys that came to live in our service brought with
them;--of contracts written in blood and left out over night, not to be
found the next morning, (removed by the Evil One, who takes his nightly
round among our dwellings, and filed away for future use,)--of dreams
coming true,--of death-signs,--of apparitions, no wonder that my
imagination got excited, and I was liable to superstitious fancies.

Jeremy Bentham's logic, by which he proved that he couldn't possibly see
a ghost is all very well-in the day-time.  All the reason in the world
will never get those impressions of childhood, created by just such
circumstances as I have been telling, out of a man's head. That is the
only excuse I have to give for the nervous kind of curiosity with which I
watch my little neighbor, and the obstinacy with which I lie awake
whenever I hear anything going on in his chamber after midnight.

But whatever further observations I may have made must be deferred for
the present.  You will see in what way it happened that my thoughts were
turned from spiritual matters to bodily ones, and how I got my fancy full
of material images,--faces, heads, figures, muscles, and so forth,--in
such a way that I should have no chance in this number to gratify any
curiosity you may feel, if I had the means of so doing.

Indeed, I have come pretty near omitting my periodical record this time.
It was all the work of a friend of mine, who would have it that I should
sit to him for my portrait.  When a soul draws a body in the great
lottery of life, where every one is sure of a prize, such as it is, the
said soul inspects the said body with the same curious interest with
which one who has ventured into a "gift enterprise" examines the "massive
silver pencil-case" with the coppery smell and impressible tube, or the
"splendid gold ring" with the questionable specific gravity, which it has
been his fortune to obtain in addition to his purchase.

The soul, having studied the article of which it finds itself proprietor,
thinks, after a time, it knows it pretty well.  But there is this
difference between its view and that of a person looking at us:--we look
from within, and see nothing but the mould formed by the elements in
which we are incased; other observers look from without, and see us as
living statues.  To be sure, by the aid of mirrors, we get a few glimpses
of our outside aspect; but this occasional impression is always modified
by that look of the soul from within outward which none but ourselves can
take.  A portrait is apt, therefore, to be a surprise to us.  The artist
looks only from without.  He sees us, too, with a hundred aspects on our
faces we are never likely to see.  No genuine expression can be studied
by the subject of it in the looking-glass.

More than this; he sees us in a way in which many of our friends or
acquaintances never see us.  Without wearing any mask we are conscious
of, we have a special face for each friend.  For, in the first place,
each puts a special reflection of himself upon us, on the principle of
assimilation you found referred to in my last record, if you happened to
read that document.  And secondly, each of our friends is capable of
seeing just so far, and no farther, into our face, and each sees in it
the particular thing that he looks for.  Now the artist, if he is truly
an artist, does not take any one of these special views.  Suppose he
should copy you as you appear to the man who wants your name to a
subscription-list, you could hardly expect a friend who entertains you to
recognize the likeness to the smiling face which sheds its radiance at
his board. Even within your own family, I am afraid there is a face which
the rich uncle knows, that is not so familiar to the poor relation.  The
artist must take one or the other, or something compounded of the two, or
something different from either.  What the daguerreotype and photograph
do is to give the features and one particular look, the very look which
kills all expression, that of self-consciousness. The artist throws you
off your guard, watches you in movement and in repose, puts your face
through its exercises, observes its transitions, and so gets the whole
range of its expression.  Out of all this he forms an ideal portrait,
which is not a copy of your exact look at any one time or to any
particular person.  Such a portrait cannot be to everybody what the
ungloved call "as nat'ral as life."  Every good picture, therefore, must
be considered wanting in resemblance by many persons.

There is one strange revelation which comes out, as the artist shapes
your features from his outline.  It is that you resemble so many
relatives to whom you yourself never had noticed any particular likeness
in your countenance.

He is at work at me now, when I catch some of these resemblances, thus:

There! that is just the look my father used to have sometimes; I never
thought I had a sign of it.  The mother's eyebrow and grayish-blue eye,
those I knew I had.  But there is a something which recalls a smile that
faded away from my sister's lips--how many years ago!  I thought it so
pleasant in her, that I love myself better for having a trace of it.

Are we not young?  Are we not fresh and blooming?  Wait, a bit.  The
artist takes a mean little brush and draws three fine lines, diverging
outwards from the eye over the temple.  Five years.--The artist draws one
tolerably distinct and two faint lines, perpendicularly between the
eyebrows.  Ten years.--The artist breaks up the contours round the mouth,
so that they look a little as a hat does that has been sat upon and
recovered itself, ready, as one would say, to crumple up again in the
same creases, on smiling or other change of feature.--Hold on!  Stop
that!  Give a young fellow a chance!  Are we not whole years short of
that interesting period of life when Mr. Balzac says that a man, etc.,
etc., etc.?

There now!  That is ourself, as we look after finishing an article,
getting a three-mile pull with the ten-foot sculls, redressing the wrongs
of the toilet, and standing with the light of hope in our eye and the
reflection of a red curtain on our cheek.  Is he not a POET that painted
us?

          "Blest be the art that can immortalize!"
                                        COWPER.

--Young folks look on a face as a unit; children who go to school with
any given little John Smith see in his name a distinctive appellation,
and in his features as special and definite an expression of his sole
individuality as if he were the first created of his race: As soon as we
are old enough to get the range of three or four generations well in
hand, and to take in large family histories, we never see an individual
in a face of any stock we know, but a mosaic copy of a pattern, with
fragmentary tints from this and that ancestor.  The analysis of a face
into its ancestral elements requires that it should be examined in the
very earliest infancy, before it has lost that ancient and solemn look it
brings with it out of the past eternity; and again in that brief space
when Life, the mighty sculptor, has done his work, and Death, his silent
servant, lifts the veil and lets us look at the marble lines he has
wrought so faithfully; and lastly, while a painter who can seize all the
traits of a countenance is building it up, feature after feature, from
the slight outline to the finished portrait.

--I am satisfied, that, as we grow older, we learn to look upon our
bodies more and more as a temporary possession and less and less as
identified with ourselves.  In early years, while the child "feels its
life in every limb," it lives in the body and for the body to a very
great extent.  It ought to be so.  There have been many very interesting
children who have shown a wonderful indifference to the things of earth
and an extraordinary development of the spiritual nature.  There is a
perfect literature of their biographies, all alike in their essentials;
the same "disinclination to the usual amusements of childhood "; the same
remarkable sensibility; the same docility; the same conscientiousness; in
short, an almost uniform character, marked by beautiful traits, which we
look at with a painful admiration.  It will be found that most of these
children are the subjects of some constitutional unfitness for living,
the most frequent of which I need not mention.  They are like the
beautiful, blushing, half-grown fruit that falls before its time because
its core is gnawed out.  They have their meaning,--they do not-live in
vain,--but they are windfalls.  I am convinced that many healthy children
are injured morally by being forced to read too much about these little
meek sufferers and their spiritual exercises.  Here is a boy that loves
to run, swim, kick football, turn somersets, make faces, whittle, fish,
tear his clothes, coast, skate, fire crackers, blow squash "tooters," cut
his name on fences, read about Robinson Crusoe and Sinbad the Sailor, eat
the widest-angled slices of pie and untold cakes and candies, crack nuts
with his back teeth and bite out the better part of another boy's apple
with his front ones, turn up coppers, "stick" knives, call names, throw
stones, knock off hats, set mousetraps, chalk doorsteps, "cut behind"
anything on wheels or runners, whistle through his teeth, "holler" Fire!
on slight evidence, run after soldiers, patronize an engine-company, or,
in his own words, "blow for tub No. 11," or whatever it may be;--isn't
that a pretty nice sort of a boy, though he has not got anything the
matter with him that takes the taste of this world out?  Now, when you
put into such a hot-blooded, hard-fisted, round-cheeked little rogue's
hand a sad-looking volume or pamphlet, with the portrait of a thin,
white-faced child, whose life is really as much a training for death as
the last month of a condemned criminal's existence, what does he find in
common between his own overflowing and exulting sense of vitality and the
experiences of the doomed offspring of invalid parents?  The time comes
when we have learned to understand the music of sorrow, the beauty of
resigned suffering, the holy light that plays over the pillow of those
who die before their time, in humble hope and trust. But it is not until
he has worked his way through the period of honest hearty animal
existence, which every robust child should make the most of,--not until
he has learned the use of his various faculties, which is his first
duty,--that a boy of courage and animal vigor is in a proper state to
read these tearful records of premature decay.  I have no doubt that
disgust is implanted in the minds of many healthy children by early
surfeits of pathological piety.  I do verily believe that He who took
children in His arms and blessed them loved the healthiest and most
playful of them just as well as those who were richest in the tuberculous
virtues.  I know what I am talking about, and there are more parents in
this country who will be willing to listen to what I say than there are
fools to pick a quarrel with me.  In the sensibility and the sanctity
which often accompany premature decay I see one of the most beautiful
instances of the principle of compensation which marks the Divine
benevolence.  But to get the spiritual hygiene of robust natures out of
the exceptional regimen of invalids is just simply what we Professors
call "bad practice"; and I know by experience that there are worthy
people who not only try it on their own children, but actually force it
on those of their neighbors.

--Having been photographed, and stereographed, and chromatographed, or
done in colors, it only remained to be phrenologized.  A polite note from
Messrs. Bumpus and Crane, requesting our attendance at their
Physiological Emporium, was too tempting to be resisted.  We repaired to
that scientific Golgotha.

Messrs. Bumpus and Crane are arranged on the plan of the man and the
woman in the toy called a "weather-house," both on the same wooden arm
suspended on a pivot,--so that when one comes to the door, the other
retires backwards, and vice versa.  The more particular speciality of one
is to lubricate your entrance and exit,--that of the other to polish you
off phrenologically in the recesses of the establishment.  Suppose
yourself in a room full of casts and pictures, before a counterful of
books with taking titles.  I wonder if the picture of the brain is there,
"approved" by a noted Phrenologist, which was copied from my, the
Professor's, folio plate, in the work of Gall and Spurzheim.  An extra
convolution, No. 9, Destructiveness, according to the list beneath, which
was not to be seen in the plate, itself a copy of Nature, was very
liberally supplied by the artist, to meet the wants of the catalogue of
"organs."  Professor Bumpus is seated in front of a row of women,
--horn-combers and gold-beaders, or somewhere about that range of
life,--looking so credulous, that, if any Second-Advent Miller or Joe
Smith should come along, he could string the whole lot of them on his
cheapest lie, as a boy strings a dozen "shiners" on a stripped twig of
willow.

The Professor (meaning ourselves) is in a hurry, as usual; let the
horn-combers wait,--he shall be bumped without inspecting the
antechamber.

Tape round the head,--22 inches.  (Come on, old 23 inches, if you think
you are the better man!)

Feels thorax and arm, and nuzzles round among muscles as those horrid old
women poke their fingers into the salt-meat on the provision-stalls at
the Quincy Market.  Vitality, No.  5 or 6, or something or other.
Victuality, (organ at epigastrium,) some other number equally
significant.

Mild champooing of head now commences.  'Extraordinary revelations!
Cupidiphilous, 6!  Hymeniphilous, 6 +!  Paediphilous, 5! Deipniphilous,
6!  Gelasmiphilous, 6!  Musikiphilous, 5! Uraniphilous, 5!
Glossiphilous, 8!! and so on.  Meant for a linguist.--Invaluable
information.  Will invest in grammars and dictionaries immediately.--I
have nothing against the grand total of my phrenological endowments.

I never set great store by my head, and did not think Messrs. Bumpus and
Crane would give me so good a lot of organs as they did, especially
considering that I was a dead-head on that occasion. Much obliged to them
for their politeness.  They have been useful in their way by calling
attention to important physiological facts. (This concession is due to
our immense bump of Candor.)

A short Lecture on Phrenology, read to the Boarders at our
Breakfast-Table.

I shall begin, my friends, with the definition of a Pseudo-science. A
Pseudo-science consists of a nomenclature, with a self-adjusting
arrangement, by which all positive evidence, or such as favors its
doctrines, is admitted, and all negative evidence, or such as tells
against it, is excluded.  It is invariably connected with some lucrative
practical application.  Its professors and practitioners are usually
shrewd people; they are very serious with the public, but wink and laugh
a good deal among themselves.  The believing multitude consists of women
of both sexes, feeble minded inquirers, poetical optimists, people who
always get cheated in buying horses, philanthropists who insist on
hurrying up the millennium, and others of this class, with here and there
a clergyman, less frequently a lawyer, very rarely a physician, and
almost never a horse-jockey or a member of the detective police.--I do
not say that Phrenology was one of the Pseudo-sciences.

A Pseudo-science does not necessarily consist wholly of lies.  It may
contain many truths, and even valuable ones.  The rottenest bank starts
with a little specie.  It puts out a thousand promises to pay on the
strength of a single dollar, but the dollar is very commonly a good one.
The practitioners of the Pseudo-sciences know that common minds, after
they have been baited with a real fact or two, will jump at the merest
rag of a lie, or even at the bare hook. When we have one fact found us,
we are very apt to supply the next out of our own imagination.  (How many
persons can read Judges xv. 16 correctly the first time?) The
Pseudo-sciences take advantage of this.--I did not say that it was so
with Phrenology.

I have rarely met a sensible man who would not allow that there was
something in Phrenology.  A broad, high forehead, it is commonly agreed,
promises intellect; one that is "villanous low" and has a huge hind-head
back of it, is wont to mark an animal nature.  I have as rarely met an
unbiassed and sensible man who really believed in the bumps.  It is
observed, however, that persons with what the Phrenologists call "good
heads" are more prone than others toward plenary belief in the doctrine.

It is so hard to prove a negative, that, if a man should assert that the
moon was in truth a green cheese, formed by the coagulable substance of
the Milky Way, and challenge me to prove the contrary, I might be
puzzled.  But if he offer to sell me a ton of this lunar cheese, I call
on him to prove the truth of the Gaseous nature of our satellite, before
I purchase.

It is not necessary to prove the falsity of the phrenological statement.
It is only necessary to show that its truth is not proved, and cannot be,
by the common course of argument.  The walls of the head are double, with
a great air-chamber between them, over the smallest and most closely
crowded "organs."  Can you tell how much money there is in a safe, which
also has thick double walls, by kneading its knobs with your fingers?  So
when a man fumbles about my forehead, and talks about the organs of
Individuality, Size, etc., I trust him as much as I should if he felt of
the outside of my strong-box and told me that there was a five-dollar or
a ten-dollar-bill under this or that particular rivet.  Perhaps there is;
only he does n't know anything about at.  But this is a point that I, the
Professor, understand, my friends, or ought to, certainly, better than
you do.  The next argument you will all appreciate.

I proceed, therefore, to explain the self-adjusting mechanism of
Phrenology, which is very similar to that of the Pseudo-sciences. An
example will show it most conveniently.

A. is a notorious thief.  Messrs. Bumpus and Crane examine him and find a
good-sized organ of Acquisitiveness.  Positive fact for Phrenology.
Casts and drawings of A. are multiplied, and the bump does not lose in
the act of copying.--I did not say it gained.--What do you look so for?
(to the boarders.)

Presently B. turns up, a bigger thief than A.  But B. has no bump at all
over Acquisitiveness.  Negative fact; goes against Phrenology.--Not a
bit of it.  Don't you see how small Conscientiousness is? That's the
reason B. stole.

And then comes C., ten times as much a thief as either A. or B.,--used
to steal before he was weaned, and would pick one of his own pockets and
put its contents in another, if he could find no other way of committing
petty larceny.  Unfortunately, C.  has a hollow, instead of a bump, over
Acquisitiveness.  Ah, but just look and see what a bump of
Alimentiveness!  Did not C. buy nuts and gingerbread, when a boy, with
the money he stole?  Of course you see why he is a thief, and how his
example confirms our noble science.

At last comes along a case which is apparently a settler, for there is a
little brain with vast and varied powers,--a case like that of Byron, for
instance.  Then comes out the grand reserve-reason which covers
everything and renders it simply impossible ever to corner a
Phrenologist.  "It is not the size alone, but the quality of an organ,
which determines its degree of power."

Oh! oh!  I see.--The argument may be briefly stated thus by the
Phrenologist: "Heads I win, tails you lose."  Well, that's convenient.

It must be confessed that Phrenology has a certain resemblance to the
Pseudo-sciences.  I did not say it was a Pseudo-science.

I have often met persons who have been altogether struck up and amazed at
the accuracy with which some wandering Professor of Phrenology had read
their characters written upon their skulls.  Of course the Professor
acquires his information solely through his cranial inspections and
manipulations.--What are you laughing at? (to the boarders.)--But let us
just suppose, for a moment, that a tolerably cunning fellow, who did not
know or care anything about Phrenology, should open a shop and undertake
to read off people's characters at fifty cents or a dollar apiece.  Let
us see how well he could get along without the "organs."

I will suppose myself to set up such a shop.  I would invest one hundred
dollars, more or less, in casts of brains, skulls, charts, and other
matters that would make the most show for the money.  That would do to
begin with.  I would then advertise myself as the celebrated Professor
Brainey, or whatever name I might choose, and wait for my first customer.
My first customer is a middle-aged man. I look at him,--ask him a
question or two, so as to hear him talk. When I have got the hang of him,
I ask him to sit down, and proceed to fumble his skull, dictating as
follows: SCALE FROM 1 TO 10.


LIST OF FACULTIES FOR           PRIVATE NOTES FOR MY PUPIL.
      CUSTOMER.
                             Each to be accompanied with a wink.

Amativeness, 7.        Most men love the conflicting sex, and all
                       men love to be told they do.

Alimentiveness, 8.     Don't you see that he has burst off his
                       lowest waistcoat-button with feeding,--hey

Acquisitiveness, 8.    Of course.  A middle-aged Yankee.

Approbativeness 7+.    Hat well brushed.  Hair ditto.  Mark the
                       effect of that plus sign.

Self-Esteem 6.         His face shows that.

Benevolence 9.         That'll please him.

Conscientiousness 8 1/2  That fraction looks first-rate.

Mirthfulness 7         Has laughed twice since he came in.

Ideality 9             That sounds well.

Form, Size, Weight,    4 to 6.  Average everything that Color, Locality,
                       cannot be guessed. Eventuality, etc. etc.

                And so of the other faculties.


Of course, you know, that isn't the way the Phrenologists do.  They go
only by the bumps.--What do you keep laughing so for?  (to the boarders.)
I only said that is the way I should practise "Phrenology" for a living.

                    End of my Lecture.


--The Reformers have good heads, generally.  Their faces are commonly
serene enough, and they are lambs in private intercourse, even though
their voices may be like

         The wolf's long howl from Oonalaska's shore,

when heard from the platform.  Their greatest spiritual danger is from
the perpetual flattery of abuse to which they are exposed. These lines
are meant to caution them.


          SAINT ANTHONY THE REFORMER.

               HIS TEMPTATION.

     No fear lest praise should make us proud!
     We know how cheaply that is won;
     The idle homage of the crowd
     Is proof of tasks as idly done.

     A surface-smile may pay the toil
     That follows still the conquering Right,
     With soft, white hands to dress the spoil
     That sunbrowned valor clutched in fight.

     Sing the sweet song of other days,
     Serenely placid, safely true,
     And o'er the present's parching ways
     Thy verse distils like evening dew.

     But speak in words of living power,
     --They fall like drops of scalding rain
     That plashed before the burning shower
     Swept o'er the cities of the plain!

     Then scowling Hate turns deadly pale,
     --Then Passion's half-coiled adders spring,
     And, smitten through their leprous mail,
     Strike right and left in hope to sting.

     If thou, unmoved by poisoning wrath,
     Thy feet on earth, thy heart above,
     Canst walk in peace thy kingly path,
     Unchanged in trust, unchilled in love,--

     Too kind for bitter words to grieve,
     Too firm for clamor to dismay,
     When Faith forbids thee to believe,
     And Meekness calls to disobey,--

     Ah, then beware of mortal pride!
     The smiling pride that calmly scorns
     Those foolish fingers, crimson dyed
     In laboring on thy crown of thorns!




IX

One of our boarders--perhaps more than one was concerned in it--sent in
some questions to me, the other day, which, trivial as some of them are,
I felt bound to answer.

1.--Whether a lady was ever known to write a letter covering only a
single page?

To this I answered, that there was a case on record where a lady had but
half a sheet of paper and no envelope; and being obliged to send through
the post-office, she covered only one side of the paper (crosswise,
lengthwise, and diagonally).

2.--What constitutes a man a gentleman?

To this I gave several answers, adapted to particular classes of
questioners.

a.  Not trying to be a gentleman.

b.  Self-respect underlying courtesy.

c.  Knowledge and observance of the fitness of things in social
intercourse.

d.  f. s. d.  (as many suppose.)

3.--Whether face or figure is most attractive in the female sex?

Answered in the following epigram, by a young man about town:

     Quoth Tom, "Though fair her features be,
     It is her figure pleases me."
     "What may her figure be?" I cried.
     "One hundred thousand!" he replied.

When this was read to the boarders, the young man John said he should
like a chance to "step up" to a figger of that kind, if the girl was one
of the right sort.

The landlady said them that merried for money didn't deserve the blessin'
of a good wife.  Money was a great thing when them that had it made a
good use of it.  She had seen better days herself, and knew what it was
never to want for anything.  One of her cousins merried a very rich old
gentleman, and she had heerd that he said he lived ten year longer than
if he'd staid by himself without anybody to take care of him.  There was
nothin' like a wife for nussin' sick folks and them that couldn't take
care of themselves.

The young man John got off a little wink, and pointed slyly with his
thumb in the direction of our diminutive friend, for whom he seemed to
think this speech was intended.

If it was meant for him, he did n't appear to know that it was. Indeed,
he seems somewhat listless of late, except when the conversation falls
upon one of those larger topics that specially interest him, and then he
grows excited, speaks loud and fast, sometimes almost savagely,--and, I
have noticed once or twice, presses his left hand to his right side, as
if there were something that ached, or weighed, or throbbed in that
region.

While he speaks in this way, the general conversation is interrupted, and
we all listen to him.  Iris looks steadily in his face, and then he will
turn as if magnetized and meet the amber eyes with his own melancholy
gaze.  I do believe that they have some kind of understanding together,
that they meet elsewhere than at our table, and that there is a mystery,
which is going to break upon us all of a sudden, involving the relations
of these two persons.  From the very first, they have taken to each
other.  The one thing they have in common is the heroic will.  In him, it
shows itself in thinking his way straightforward, in doing battle for
"free trade and no right of search" on the high seas of religious
controversy, and especially in fighting the battles of his crooked old
city.  In her, it is standing up for her little friend with the most
queenly disregard of the code of boarding-house etiquette.  People may
say or look what they like,--she will have her way about this sentiment
of hers.

The Poor Relation is in a dreadful fidget whenever the Little Gentleman
says anything that interferes with her own infallibility. She seems to
think Faith must go with her face tied up, as if she had the
toothache,--and that if she opens her mouth to the quarter the wind blows
from, she will catch her "death o' cold."

The landlady herself came to him one day, as I have found out, and tried
to persuade him to hold his tongue.--The boarders was gettin'
uneasy,--she said,--and some of 'em would go, she mistrusted, if he
talked any more about things that belonged to the ministers to settle.
She was a poor woman, that had known better days, but all her livin'
depended on her boarders, and she was sure there was n't any of 'em she
set so much by as she did by him; but there was them that never liked to
hear about sech things, except on Sundays.

The Little Gentleman looked very smiling at the landlady, who smiled even
more cordially in return, and adjusted her cap-ribbon with an unconscious
movement,--a reminiscence of the long-past pairing-time, when she had
smoothed her locks and softened her voice, and won her mate by these and
other bird-like graces.--My dear Madam,--he said,--I will remember your
interests, and speak only of matters to which I am totally
indifferent.--I don't doubt he meant this; but a day or two after,
something stirred him up, and I heard his voice uttering itself aloud,
thus:

-It must be done, Sir!--he was saying,--it must be done!  Our religion
has been Judaized, it has been Romanized, it has been Orientalized, it
has been Anglicized, and the time is at hand when it must be
AMERICANIZED!  Now, Sir, you see what Americanizing is in politics;--it
means that a man shall have a vote because he is a man,--and shall vote
for whom he pleases, without his neighbor's interference.  If he chooses
to vote for the Devil, that is his lookout;--perhaps he thinks the Devil
is better than the other candidates; and I don't doubt he's often right,
Sir.  Just so a man's soul has a vote in the spiritual community; and it
doesn't do, Sir, or it won't do long, to call him "schismatic" and
"heretic" and those other wicked names that the old murderous Inquisitors
have left us to help along "peace and goodwill to men"!

As long as you could catch a man and drop him into an oubliette, or pull
him out a few inches longer by machinery, or put a hot iron through his
tongue, or make him climb up a ladder and sit on a board at the top of a
stake so that he should be slowly broiled by the fire kindled round it,
there was some sense in these words; they led to something.  But since we
have done with those tools, we had better give up those words.  I should
like to see a Yankee advertisement like this!--(the Little Gentleman
laughed fiercely as he uttered the words,--)

--Patent thumb-screws,--will crush the bone in three turns.

--The cast-iron boot, with wedge and mallet, only five dollars!

--The celebrated extension-rack, warranted to stretch a man six inches in
twenty minutes,--money returned, if it proves unsatisfactory.

I should like to see such an advertisement, I say, Sir!  Now, what's the
use of using the words that belonged with the thumb-screws, and the
Blessed Virgin with the knives under her petticoats and sleeves and
bodice, and the dry pan and gradual fire, if we can't have the things
themselves, Sir?  What's the use of painting the fire round a poor
fellow, when you think it won't do to kindle one under him,--as they did
at Valencia or Valladolid, or wherever it was?

--What story is that?--I said.

Why,--he answered,--at the last auto-da-fe, in 1824 or '5, or somewhere
there,--it's a traveller's story, but a mighty knowing traveller he
is,--they had a "heretic" to use up according to the statutes provided
for the crime of private opinion.  They could n't quite make up their
minds to burn him, so they only hung him in a hogshead painted all over
with flames!

No, Sir! when a man calls you names because you go to the ballot-box and
vote for your candidate, or because you say this or that is your opinion,
he forgets in which half of the world he was born, Sir!  It won't be
long, Sir, before we have Americanized religion as we have Americanized
government; and then, Sir, every soul God sends into the world will be
good in the face of all men for just so much of His "inspiration" as
"giveth him understanding"!--None of my words, Sir! none of my words!

--If Iris does not love this Little Gentleman, what does love look like
when one sees it?  She follows him with her eyes, she leans over toward
him when he speaks, her face changes with the changes of his speech, so
that one might think it was with her as with Christabel,--

          That all her features were resigned
          To this sole image in her mind.

But she never looks at him with such intensity of devotion as when he
says anything about the soul and the soul's atmosphere, religion.

Women are twice as religious as men;--all the world knows that. Whether
they are any better, in the eyes of Absolute Justice, might be
questioned; for the additional religious element supplied by sex hardly
seems to be a matter of praise or blame.  But in all common aspects they
are so much above us that we get most of our religion from them,--from
their teachings, from their example,--above all, from their pure
affections.

Now this poor little Iris had been talked to strangely in her childhood.
Especially she had been told that she hated all good things,--which every
sensible parent knows well enough is not true of a great many children,
to say the least.  I have sometimes questioned whether many libels on
human nature had not been a natural consequence of the celibacy of the
clergy, which was enforced for so long a period.

The child had met this and some other equally encouraging statements as
to her spiritual conditions, early in life, and fought the battle of
spiritual independence prematurely, as many children do.  If all she did
was hateful to God, what was the meaning of the approving or else the
disapproving conscience, when she had done "right" or "wrong"?  No
"shoulder-striker" hits out straighter than a child with its logic.  Why,
I can remember lying in my bed in the nursery and settling questions
which all that I have heard since and got out of books has never been
able to raise again.  If a child does not assert itself in this way in
good season, it becomes just what its parents or teachers were, and is no
better than a plastic image.--How old was I at the time?--I suppose
about 5823 years old,--that is, counting from Archbishop Usher's date of
the Creation, and adding the life of the race, whose accumulated
intelligence is a part of my inheritance, to my own.  A good deal older
than Plato, you see, and much more experienced than my Lord Bacon and
most of the world's teachers.--Old books, as you well know, are books of
the world's youth, and new books are fruits of its age.  How many of all
these ancient folios round me are like so many old cupels!  The gold has
passed out of them long ago, but their pores are full of the dross with
which it was mingled.

And so Iris--having thrown off that first lasso which not only fetters,
but chokes those whom it can hold, so that they give themselves up
trembling and breathless to the great soul-subduer, who has them by the
windpipe had settled a brief creed for herself, in which love of the
neighbor, whom we have seen, was the first article, and love of the
Creator, whom we have not seen, grew out of this as its natural
development, being necessarily second in order of time to the first
unselfish emotions which we feel for the fellow-creatures who surround us
in our early years.

The child must have some place of worship.  What would a young girl be
who never mingled her voice with the songs and prayers that rose all
around her with every returning day of rest?  And Iris was free to
choose.  Sometimes one and sometimes another would offer to carry her to
this or that place of worship; and when the doors were hospitably opened,
she would often go meekly in by herself.  It was a curious fact, that two
churches as remote from each other in doctrine as could well be divided
her affections.

The Church of Saint Polycarp had very much the look of a Roman Catholic
chapel.  I do not wish to run the risk of giving names to the
ecclesiastical furniture which gave it such a Romish aspect; but there
were pictures, and inscriptions in antiquated characters, and there were
reading-stands, and flowers on the altar, and other elegant arrangements.
Then there were boys to sing alternately in choirs responsive to each
other, and there was much bowing, with very loud responding, and a long
service and a short sermon, and a bag, such as Judas used to hold in the
old pictures, was carried round to receive contributions.  Everything was
done not only "decently and in order," but, perhaps one might say, with a
certain air of magnifying their office on the part of the dignified
clergymen, often two or three in number.  The music and the free welcome
were grateful to Iris, and she forgot her prejudices at the door of the
chapel.  For this was a church with open doors, with seats for all
classes and all colors alike,--a church of zealous worshippers after
their faith, of charitable and serviceable men and women, one that took
care of its children and never forgot its poor, and whose people were
much more occupied in looking out for their own souls than in attacking
the faith of their neighbors.  In its mode of worship there was a union
of two qualities,--the taste and refinement, which the educated require
just as much in their churches as elsewhere, and the air of stateliness,
almost of pomp, which impresses the common worshipper, and is often not
without its effect upon those who think they hold outward forms as of
little value.  Under the half-Romish aspect of the Church of Saint
Polycarp, the young girl found a devout and loving and singularly
cheerful religious spirit.  The artistic sense, which betrayed itself in
the dramatic proprieties of its ritual, harmonized with her taste.  The
mingled murmur of the loud responses, in those rhythmic phrases, so
simple, yet so fervent, almost as if every tenth heart-beat, instead of
its dull tic-tac, articulated itself as "Good Lord, deliver us!  "--the
sweet alternation of the two choirs, as their holy song floated from side
to side, the keen young voices rising like a flight of singing-birds that
passes from one grove to another, carrying its music with it back and
forward,--why should she not love these gracious outward signs of those
inner harmonies which none could deny made beautiful the lives of many of
her fellow-worshippers in the humble, yet not inelegant Chapel of Saint
Polycarp?

The young Marylander, who was born and bred to that mode of worship, had
introduced her to the chapel, for which he did the honors for such of our
boarders as were not otherwise provided for.  I saw them looking over the
same prayer-book one Sunday, and I could not help thinking that two such
young and handsome persons could hardly worship together in safety for a
great while.  But they seemed to mind nothing but their prayer-book.
By-and-by the silken bag was handed round.--I don't believe she will; so
awkward, you know;--besides, she only came by invitation.  There she is,
with her hand in her pocket, though,--and sure enough, her little bit of
silver tinkled as it struck the coin beneath.  God bless her! she has n't
much to give; but her eye glistens when she gives it, and that is all
Heaven asks.--That was the first time I noticed these young people
together, and I am sure they behaved with the most charming
propriety,--in fact, there was one of our silent lady-boarders with them,
whose eyes would have kept Cupid and Psyche to their good behavior.  A
day or two after this I noticed that the young gentleman had left his
seat, which you may remember was at the corner diagonal to that of Iris,
so that they have been as far removed from each other as they could be at
the table.  His new seat is three or four places farther down the table.
Of course I made a romance out of this, at once.  So stupid not to see
it!  How could it be otherwise?--Did you speak, Madam?  I beg your
pardon.  (To my lady-reader.)

I never saw anything like the tenderness with which this young girl
treats her little deformed neighbor.  If he were in the way of going to
church, I know she would follow him.  But his worship, if any, is not
with the throng of men and women and staring children.

I, the Professor, on the other hand, am a regular church-goer.  I should
go for various reasons if I did not love it; but I am happy enough to
find great pleasure in the midst of devout multitudes, whether I can
accept all their creeds or not.  One place of worship comes nearer than
the rest to my ideal standard, and to this it was that I carried our
young girl.

The Church of the Galileans, as it is called, is even humbler in outside
pretensions than the Church of Saint Polycarp.  Like that, it is open to
all comers.  The stranger who approaches it looks down a quiet street and
sees the plainest of chapels,--a kind of wooden tent, that owes whatever
grace it has to its pointed windows and the high, sharp roofs--traces,
both, of that upward movement of ecclesiastical architecture which soared
aloft in cathedral-spires, shooting into the sky as the spike of a
flowering aloe from the cluster of broad, sharp-wedged leaves below.
This suggestion of medieval symbolism, aided by a minute turret in which
a hand-bell might have hung and found just room enough to turn over, was
all of outward show the small edifice could boast.  Within there was very
little that pretended to be attractive.  A small organ at one side, and a
plain pulpit, showed that the building was a church; but it was a church
reduced to its simplest expression:

Yet when the great and wise monarch of the East sat upon his throne, in
all the golden blaze of the spoils of Ophir and the freights of the navy
of Tarshish, his glory was not like that of this simple chapel in its
Sunday garniture.  For the lilies of the field, in their season, and the
fairest flowers of the year, in due succession, were clustered every
Sunday morning over the preacher's desk.  Slight, thin-tissued blossoms
of pink and blue and virgin white in early spring, then the full-breasted
and deep-hearted roses of summer, then the velvet-robed crimson and
yellow flowers of autumn, and in the winter delicate exotics that grew
under skies of glass in the false summers of our crystal palaces without
knowing that it was the dreadful winter of New England which was rattling
the doors and frosting the panes,--in their language the whole year told
its history of life and growth and beauty from that simple desk.  There
was always at least one good sermon,--this floral homily.  There was at
least one good prayer,--that brief space when all were silent, after the
manner of the Friends at their devotions.

Here, too, Iris found an atmosphere of peace and love.  The same gentle,
thoughtful faces, the same cheerful but reverential spirit, the same
quiet, the same life of active benevolence.  But in all else how
different from the Church of Saint Polycarp!  No clerical costume, no
ceremonial forms, no carefully trained choirs.  A liturgy they have, to
be sure, which does not scruple to borrow from the time-honored manuals
of devotion, but also does not hesitate to change its expressions to its
own liking.

Perhaps the good people seem a little easy with each other;--they are apt
to nod familiarly, and have even been known to whisper before the
minister came in.  But it is a relief to get rid of that old
Sunday--no,--Sabbath face, which suggests the idea that the first day of
the week is commemorative of some most mournful event. The truth is,
these brethren and sisters meet very much as a family does for its
devotions, not putting off their humanity in the least, considering it on
the whole quite a delightful matter to come together for prayer and song
and good counsel from kind and wise lips.  And if they are freer in their
demeanor than some very precise congregations, they have not the air of a
worldly set of people.  Clearly they have not come to advertise their
tailors and milliners, nor for the sake of exchanging  criticisms on the
literary character of the sermon they  may hear.  There is no
restlessness and no restraint  among these quiet, cheerful worshippers.
One thing  that keeps them calm and happy during the season so evidently
trying to many congregations is, that they join very generally in the
singing.  In this way they  get rid of that accumulated nervous force
which escapes in all sorts of fidgety movements, so that a minister
trying to keep his congregation still reminds one of a boy with his hand
over the nose of a pump which another boy is working,--this spirting
impatience of the people is so like the jets that find their way through
his fingers, and the grand rush out at the final Amen! has such a
wonderful likeness to the gush that takes place when the boy pulls his
hand away, with immense relief, as it seems, to both the pump and the
officiating youngster.

How sweet is this blending of all voices and all hearts in one common
song of praise!  Some will sing a little loud, perhaps,--and now and then
an impatient chorister will get a syllable or two in advance, or an
enchanted singer so lose all thought of time and place in the luxury of a
closing cadence that he holds on to the last semi-breve upon his private
responsibility; but how much more of the spirit of the old Psalmist in
the music of these imperfectly trained voices than in the academic
niceties of the paid performers who take our musical worship out of our
hands!

I am of the opinion that the creed of the Church of the Galileans is not
laid down in as many details as that of the Church of Saint Polycarp.
Yet I suspect, if one of the good people from each of those churches had
met over the bed of a suffering fellow-creature, or for the promotion of
any charitable object, they would have found they had more in common than
all the special beliefs or want of beliefs that separated them would
amount to.  There are always many who believe that the fruits of a tree
afford a better test of its condition than a statement of the composts
with which it is dressed, though the last has its meaning and importance,
no doubt.

Between these two churches, then, our young Iris divides her affections.
But I doubt if she listens to the preacher at either with more devotion
than she does to her little neighbor when he talks of these matters.

What does he believe?  In the first place, there is some deep-rooted
disquiet lying at the bottom of his soul, which makes him very bitter
against all kinds of usurpation over the right of private judgment.  Over
this seems to lie a certain tenderness for humanity in general, bred out
of life-long trial, I should say, but sharply streaked with fiery lines
of wrath at various individual acts of wrong, especially if they come in
an ecclesiastical shape, and recall to him the days when his mother's
great-grandmother was strangled on Witch Hill, with a text from the Old
Testament for her halter.  With all this, he has a boundless belief in
the future of this experimental hemisphere, and especially in the destiny
of the free thought of its northeastern metropolis.

--A man can see further, Sir,--he said one day,--from the top of Boston
State House, and see more that is worth seeing, than from all the
pyramids and turrets and steeples in all the places in the world!  No
smoke, Sir; no fog, Sir; and a clean sweep from the Outer Light and the
sea beyond it to the New Hampshire mountains!  Yes, Sir,--and there are
great truths that are higher than mountains and broader than seas, that
people are looking for from the tops of these hills of ours;--such as the
world never saw, though it might have seen them at Jerusalem, if its eyes
had been open!--Where do they have most crazy people?  Tell me that, Sir!

I answered, that I had heard it said there were more in New England than
in most countries, perhaps more than in any part of the world.

Very good, Sir,--he answered.--When have there been most people killed
and wounded in the course of this century?

During the wars of the French Empire, no doubt,--I said.

That's it! that's it!--said the Little Gentleman;--where the battle of
intelligence is fought, there are most minds bruised and broken! We're
battling for a faith here, Sir.

The divinity-student remarked, that it was rather late in the world's
history for men to be looking out for a new faith.

I did n't say a new faith,--said the Little Gentleman;--old or new, it
can't help being different here in this American mind of ours from
anything that ever was before; the people are new, Sir, and that makes
the difference.  One load of corn goes to the sty, and makes the fat of
swine,--another goes to the farm-house, and becomes the muscle that
clothes the right arms of heroes.  It is n't where a pawn stands on the
board that makes the difference, but what the game round it is when it is
on this or that square.

Can any man look round and see what Christian countries are now doing,
and how they are governed, and what is the general condition of society,
without seeing that Christianity is the flag under which the world sails,
and not the rudder that steers its course?  No, Sir!  There was a great
raft built about two thousand years ago,--call it an ark, rather,--the
world's great ark! big enough to hold all mankind, and made to be
launched right out into the open waves of life,--and here it has been
lying, one end on the shore and one end bobbing up and down in the water,
men fighting all the time as to who should be captain and who should have
the state-rooms, and throwing each other over the side because they could
not agree about the points of compass, but the great vessel never getting
afloat with its freight of nations and their rulers;--and now, Sir, there
is and has been for this long time a fleet of "heretic" lighters sailing
out of Boston Bay, and they have been saying, and they say now, and they
mean to keep saying, "Pump out your bilge-water, shovel over your loads
of idle ballast, get out your old rotten cargo, and we will carry it out
into deep waters and sink it where it will never be seen again; so shall
the ark of the world's hope float on the ocean, instead of sticking in
the dock-mud where it is lying!"

It's a slow business, this of getting the ark launched.  The Jordan was
n't deep enough, and the Tiber was n't deep enough, and the Rhone was n't
deep enough, and the Thames was n't deep enough, and perhaps the Charles
is n't deep enough; but I don't feel sure of that, Sir, and I love to
hear the workmen knocking at the old blocks of tradition and making the
ways smooth with the oil of the Good Samaritan.  I don't know, Sir,--but
I do think she stirs a little,--I do believe she slides;--and when I
think of what a work that is for the dear old three-breasted mother of
American liberty, I would not take all the glory of all the greatest
cities in the world for my birthright in the soil of little Boston!

--Some of us could not help smiling at this burst of local patriotism,
especially when it finished with the last two words.

And Iris smiled, too.  But it was the radiant smile of pleasure which
always lights up her face when her little neighbor gets excited on the
great topics of progress in freedom and religion, and especially on the
part which, as he pleases himself with believing, his own city is to take
in that consummation of human development to which he looks forward.

Presently she looked into his face with a changed expression,--the
anxiety of a mother that sees her child suffering.

You are not well,--she said.

I am never well,--he answered.--His eyes fell mechanically on the
death's-head ring he wore on his right hand.  She took his hand as if it
had been a baby's, and turned the grim device so that it should be out of
sight.  One slight, sad, slow movement of the head seemed to say, "The
death-symbol is still there!"

A very odd personage, to be sure!  Seems to know what is going on,
--reads books, old and new,--has many recent publications sent him, they
tell me, but, what is more curious, keeps up with the everyday affairs of
the world, too.  Whether he hears everything that is said with
preternatural acuteness, or whether some confidential friend visits him
in a quiet way, is more than I can tell.  I can make nothing more of the
noises I hear in his room than my old conjectures.  The movements I
mention are less frequent, but I often hear the plaintive cry,--I observe
that it is rarely laughing of late;--I never have detected one articulate
word, but I never heard such tones from anything but a human voice.

There has been, of late, a deference approaching to tenderness, on the
part of the boarders generally so far as he is concerned.  This is
doubtless owing to the air of suffering which seems to have saddened his
look of late.  Either some passion is gnawing at him inwardly, or some
hidden disease is at work upon him.

--What 's the matter with Little Boston?--said the young man John to me
one day.--There a'n't much of him, anyhow; but 't seems to me he looks
peakeder than ever.  The old woman says he's in a bad way, 'n' wants a
puss to take care of him.  Them pusses that take care of old rich folks
marry 'em sometimes,--'n' they don't commonly live a great while after
that.  No, Sir!  I don't see what he wants to die for, after he's taken
so much trouble to live in such poor accommodations as that crooked body
of his.  I should like to know how his soul crawled into it, 'n' how it's
goin' to get out.  What business has he to die, I should like to know?
Let Ma'am Allen (the gentleman with the diamond) die, if he likes, and be
(this is a family-magazine); but we a'n't goin' to have him dyin'.  Not
by a great sight.  Can't do without him anyhow.  A'n't it fun to hear him
blow off his steam?

I believe the young fellow would take it as a personal insult, if the
Little Gentleman should show any symptoms of quitting our table for a
better world.

--In the mean time, what with going to church in company with our young
lady, and taking every chance I could get to talk with her, I have found
myself becoming, I will not say intimate, but well acquainted with Miss
Iris.  There is a certain frankness and directness about her that perhaps
belong to her artist nature.  For, you see, the one thing that marks the
true artist is a clear perception and a firm, bold hand, in distinction
from that imperfect mental vision and uncertain touch which give us the
feeble pictures and the lumpy statues of the mere artisans on canvas or
in stone.  A true artist, therefore, can hardly fail to have a sharp,
well-defined mental physiognomy.  Besides this, many young girls have a
strange audacity blended with their instinctive delicacy.  Even in
physical daring many of them are a match for boys; whereas you will find
few among mature women, and especially if they are mothers, who do not
confess, and not unfrequently proclaim, their timidity.  One of these
young girls, as many of us hereabouts remember, climbed to the top of a
jagged, slippery rock lying out in the waves,--an ugly height to get up,
and a worse one to get down, even for a bold young fellow of sixteen.
Another was in the way of climbing tall trees for crows' nests,--and
crows generally know about how far boys can "shin up," and set their
household establishments above that high-water mark.  Still another of
these young ladies I saw for the first time in an open boat, tossing on
the ocean ground-swell, a mile or two from shore, off a lonely island.
She lost all her daring, after she had some girls of her own to look out
for.

Many blondes are very gentle, yielding in character, impressible,
unelastic.  But the positive blondes, with the golden tint running
through them, are often full of character.  They come, probably enough,
from those deep-bosomed German women that Tacitus portrayed in such
strong colors.  The negative blondes, or those women whose tints have
faded out as their line of descent has become impoverished, are of
various blood, and in them the soul has often become pale with that
blanching of the hair and loss of color in the eyes which makes them
approach the character of Albinesses.

I see in this young girl that union of strength and sensibility which,
when directed and impelled by the strong instinct so apt to accompany
this combination of active and passive capacity, we call genius.  She is
not an accomplished artist, certainly, as yet; but there is always an air
in every careless figure she draws, as it were of upward aspiration,--the
elan of John of Bologna's Mercury,--a lift to them, as if they had on
winged sandals, like the herald of the Gods.  I hear her singing
sometimes; and though she evidently is not trained, yet is there a wild
sweetness in her fitful and sometimes fantastic melodies,--such as can
come only from the inspiration of the moment,--strangely enough,
reminding me of those long passages I have heard from my little
neighbor's room, yet of different tone, and by no means to be mistaken
for those weird harmonies.

I cannot pretend to deny that I am interested in the girl.  Alone,
unprotected, as I have seen so many young girls left in boarding-houses,
the centre of all the men's eyes that surround the table, watched with
jealous sharpness by every woman, most of all by that poor relation of
our landlady, who belongs to the class of women that like to catch others
in mischief when they themselves are too mature for indiscretions, (as
one sees old rogues turn to thief-catchers,) one of Nature's gendarmerie,
clad in a complete suit of wrinkles, the cheapest coat-of-mail against
the shafts of the great little enemy,--so surrounded, Iris spans this
commonplace household-life of ours with her arch of beauty, as the
rainbow, whose name she borrows, looks down on a dreary pasture with its
feeding flocks and herds of indifferent animals.

These young girls that live in boarding-houses can do pretty much as they
will.  The female gendarmes are off guard occasionally.  The sitting-room
has its solitary moments, when any two boarders who wish to meet may come
together accidentally, (accidentally, I said, Madam, and I had not the
slightest intention of Italicizing the word,) and discuss the social or
political questions of the day, or any other subject that may prove
interesting.  Many charming conversations take place at the foot of the
stairs, or while one of the parties is holding the latch of a door,--in
the shadow of porticoes, and especially on those outside balconies which
some of our Southern neighbors call "stoops," the most charming places in
the world when the moon is just right and the roses and honeysuckles are
in full blow,--as we used to think in eighteen hundred and never mention
it.

On such a balcony or "stoop," one evening, I walked with Iris.  We were
on pretty good terms now, and I had coaxed her arm under mine,--my left
arm, of course.  That leaves one's right arm free to defend the lovely
creature, if the rival--odious wretch! attempt, to ravish her from your
side.  Likewise if one's heart should happen to beat a little, its mute
language will not be without its meaning, as you will perceive when the
arm you hold begins to tremble, a circumstance like to occur, if you
happen to be a good-looking young fellow, and you two have the "stoop" to
yourselves.

We had it to ourselves that evening.  The Koh-inoor, as we called him,
was in a corner with our landlady's daughter.  The young fellow John was
smoking out in the yard.  The gendarme was afraid of the evening air, and
kept inside, The young Marylander came to the door, looked out and saw us
walking together, gave his hat a pull over his forehead and stalked off.
I felt a slight spasm, as it were, in the arm I held, and saw the girl's
head turn over her shoulder for a second.  What a kind creature this is!
She has no special interest in this youth, but she does not like to see a
young fellow going off because he feels as if he were not wanted.

She had her locked drawing-book under her arm.--Let me take it,--I said.

She gave it to me to carry.

This is full of caricatures of all of us, I am sure,--said I.

She laughed, and said,--No,--not all of you.

I was there, of course?

Why, no,--she had never taken so much pains with me.

Then she would let me see the inside of it?

She would think of it.

Just as we parted, she took a little key from her pocket and handed it to
me.  This unlocks my naughty book,--she said,--you shall see it.  I am
not afraid of you.

I don't know whether the last words exactly pleased me.  At any rate, I
took the book and hurried with it to my room.  I opened it, and saw, in a
few glances, that I held the heart of Iris in my hand.

--I have no verses for you this month, except these few lines suggested
by the season.


               MIDSUMMER.

     Here! sweep these foolish leaves away,
     I will not crush my brains to-day!
     Look! are the southern curtains drawn?
     Fetch me a fan, and so begone!

     Not that,--the palm-tree's rustling leaf
     Brought from a parching coral-reef!
     Its breath is heated;--I would swing
     The broad gray plumes,--the eagle's wing.

     I hate these roses' feverish blood!
     Pluck me a half-blown lily-bud,
     A long-stemmed lily from the lake,
     Cold as a coiling water-snake.

     Rain me sweet odors on the air,
     And wheel me up my Indian chair,
     And spread some book not overwise
     Flat out before my sleepy eyes.

     --Who knows it not,--this dead recoil
     Of weary fibres stretched with toil,
     The pulse that flutters faint and low
     When Summer's seething breezes blow?

     O Nature! bare thy loving breast
     And give thy child one hour of rest,
     One little hour to lie unseen
     Beneath thy scarf of leafy green!

     So, curtained by a singing pine,
     Its murmuring voice shall blend with mine,
     Till, lost in dreams, my faltering lay
     In sweeter music dies away.



X

               IRIS, HER BOOK

     I pray thee by the soul of her that bore thee,
     By thine own sister's spirit I implore thee,
     Deal gently with the leaves that lie before thee!

     For Iris had no mother to infold her,
     Nor ever leaned upon a sister's shoulder,
     Telling the twilight thoughts that Nature told her.

     She had not learned the mystery of awaking
     Those chorded keys that soothe a sorrow's aching,
     Giving the dumb heart voice, that else were breaking.

     Yet lived, wrought, suffered.  Lo, the pictured token!
     Why should her fleeting day-dreams fade unspoken,
     Like daffodils that die with sheaths unbroken?

     She knew not love, yet lived in maiden fancies,
     Walked simply clad, a queen of high romances,
     And talked strange tongues with angels in her trances.

     Twin-souled she seemed, a twofold nature wearing,
     Sometimes a flashing falcon in her daring,
     Then a poor mateless dove that droops despairing.

     Questioning all things: Why her Lord had sent her?
     What were these torturing gifts, and wherefore lent her?
     Scornful as spirit fallen, its own tormentor.

     And then all tears and anguish: Queen of Heaven,
     Sweet Saints, and Thou by mortal sorrows riven,
     Save me! oh, save me!  Shall I die forgiven?

     And then--Ah, God!  But nay, it little matters
     Look at the wasted seeds that autumn scatters,
     The myriad germs that Nature shapes and shatters!

     If she had--Well!  She longed, and knew not wherefore
     Had the world nothing she might live to care for?
     No second self to say her evening prayer for?

     She knew the marble shapes that set men dreaming,
     Yet with her shoulders bare and tresses streaming
     Showed not unlovely to her simple seeming.

     Vain?  Let it be so!  Nature was her teacher.
     What if a lonely and unsistered creature
     Loved her own harmless gift of pleasing feature,

     Saying, unsaddened,--This shall soon be faded,
     And double-hued the shining tresses braided,
     And all the sunlight of the morning shaded?

     --This her poor book is full of saddest follies,
     Of tearful smiles and laughing melancholies,
     With summer roses twined and wintry hollies.

     In the strange crossing of uncertain chances,
     Somewhere, beneath some maiden's tear-dimmed glances
     May fall her little book of dreams and fancies.

     Sweet sister!  Iris, who shall never name thee,
     Trembling for fear her open heart may shame thee,
     Speaks from this vision-haunted page to claim thee.

     Spare her, I pray thee!  If the maid is sleeping,
     Peace with her! she has had her hour of weeping.
     No more!  She leaves her memory in thy keeping.

These verses were written in the first leaves of the locked volume. As I
turned the pages, I hesitated for a moment.  Is it quite fair to take
advantage of a generous, trusting impulse to read the unsunned depths of
a young girl's nature, which I can look through, as the balloon-voyagers
tell us they see from their hanging-baskets through the translucent
waters which the keenest eye of such as sail over them in ships might
strive to pierce in vain?  Why has the child trusted me with such artless
confessions,--self-revelations, which might be whispered by trembling
lips, under the veil of twilight, in sacred confessionals, but which I
cannot look at in the light of day without a feeling of wronging a sacred
confidence?

To all this the answer seemed plain enough after a little thought. She
did not know how fearfully she had disclosed herself; she was too
profoundly innocent.  Her soul was no more ashamed than the fair shapes
that walked in Eden without a thought of over-liberal loveliness.  Having
nobody to tell her story to,--having, as she said in her verses, no
musical instrument to laugh and cry with her,--nothing, in short, but the
language of pen and pencil,--all the veinings of her nature were
impressed on these pages as those of a fresh leaf are transferred to the
blank sheets which inclose it. It was the same thing which I remember
seeing beautifully shown in a child of some four or five years we had one
day at our boarding-house.  The child was a deaf mute.  But its soul had
the inner sense that answers to hearing, and the shaping capacity which
through natural organs realizes itself in words.  Only it had to talk
with its face alone; and such speaking eyes, such rapid alternations of
feeling and shifting expressions of thought as flitted over its face, I
have never seen in any other human countenance.

I wonder if something of spiritual transparency is not typified in the
golden-blonde organization.  There are a great many little
creatures,--many small fishes, for instance,--which are literally
transparent, with the exception of some of the internal organs.  The
heart can be seen beating as if in a case of clouded crystal.  The
central nervous column with its sheath runs as a dark stripe through the
whole length of the diaphanous muscles of the body.  Other little
creatures are so darkened with pigment that we can see only their
surface.  Conspirators and poisoners are painted with black, beady-eyes
and swarthy hue; Judas, in Leonardo's picture, is the model of them all.

However this may be, I should say there never had been a book like this
of Iris,--so full of the heart's silent language, so transparent that the
heart itself could be seen beating through it. I should say there never
could have been such a book, but for one recollection, which is not
peculiar to myself, but is shared by a certain number of my former
townsmen.  If you think I over-color this matter of the young girl's
book, hear this, which there are others, as I just said, besides myself,
will tell you is strictly true.


THE BOOK OF THE THREE MAIDEN SISTERS.

In the town called Cantabridge, now a city, water-veined and gas
windpiped, in the street running down to the Bridge, beyond which dwelt
Sally, told of in a book of a friend of mine, was of old a house
inhabited by three maidens.  They left no near kinsfolk, I believe;
whether they did or not, I have no ill to speak of them; for they lived
and died in all good report and maidenly credit.  The house they lived in
was of the small, gambrel-roofed cottage pattern, after the shape of
Esquires' houses, but after the size of the dwellings of handicraftsmen.
The lower story was fitted up as a shop.  Specially was it provided with
one of those half-doors now so rarely met with, which are to whole doors
as spencers worn by old folk are to coats.  They speak of limited
commerce united with a social or observing disposition--on the part of
the shopkeeper,--allowing, as they do, talk with passers-by, yet keeping
off such as have not the excuse of business to cross the threshold.  On
the door-posts, at either side, above the half-door, hung certain
perennial articles of merchandise, of which my memory still has hanging
among its faded photographs a kind of netted scarf and some pairs of
thick woollen stockings.  More articles, but not very many, were stored
inside; and there was one drawer, containing children's books, out of
which I once was treated to a minute quarto ornamented with handsome
cuts.  This was the only purchase I ever knew to be made at the shop kept
by the three maiden ladies, though it is probable there were others.  So
long as I remember the shop, the same scarf and, I should say, the same
stockings hung on the door-posts.--You think I am exaggerating again, and
that shopkeepers would not keep the same article exposed for years.  Come
to me, the Professor, and I will take you in five minutes to a shop in
this city where I will show you an article hanging now in the very place
where more than thirty years ago I myself inquired the price of it of the
present head of the establishment. [ This was a glass alembic, which hung
up in Daniel Henchman's apothecary shop, corner of Cambridge and Chambers
streets.]

The three maidens were of comely presence, and one of them had had claims
to be considered a Beauty.  When I saw them in the old meeting-house on
Sundays, as they rustled in through the aisles in silks and satins, not
gay, but more than decent, as I remember them, I thought of My Lady
Bountiful in the history of "Little King Pippin," and of the Madam Blaize
of Goldsmith (who, by the way, must have taken the hint of it from a
pleasant poem, "Monsieur de la Palisse," attributed to De la Monnoye, in
the collection of French songs before me).  There was some story of an
old romance in which the Beauty had played her part.  Perhaps they all
had had lovers; for, as I said, they were shapely and seemly personages,
as I remember them; but their lives were out of the flower and in the
berry at the time of my first recollections.

One after another they all three dropped away, objects of kindly
attention to the good people round, leaving little or almost nothing, and
nobody to inherit it.  Not absolutely nothing, of course.  There must
have been a few old dresses--perhaps some bits of furniture, a Bible, and
the spectacles the good old souls read it through, and little keepsakes,
such as make us cry to look at, when we find them in old drawers;--such
relics there must have been.  But there was more.  There was a manuscript
of some hundred pages, closely written, in which the poor things had
chronicled for many years the incidents of their daily life.  After their
death it was passed round somewhat freely, and fell into my hands.  How I
have cried and laughed and colored over it!  There was nothing in it to
be ashamed of, perhaps there was nothing in it to laugh at, but such a
picture of the mode of being of poor simple good old women I do believe
was never drawn before.  And there were all the smallest incidents
recorded, such as do really make up humble life, but which die out of all
mere literary memoirs, as the houses where the Egyptians or the Athenians
lived crumble and leave only their temples standing.  I know, for
instance, that on a given day of a certain year, a kindly woman, herself
a poor widow, now, I trust, not without special mercies in heaven for her
good deeds,--for I read her name on a proper tablet in the churchyard a
week ago,--sent a fractional pudding from her own table to the Maiden
Sisters, who, I fear, from the warmth and detail of their description,
were fasting, or at least on short allowance, about that time.  I know
who sent them the segment of melon, which in her riotous fancy one of
them compared to those huge barges to which we give the ungracious name
of mudscows.  But why should I illustrate further what it seems almost a
breach of confidence to speak of?  Some kind friend, who could challenge
a nearer interest than the curious strangers into whose hands the book
might fall, at last claimed it, and I was glad that it should be
henceforth sealed to common eyes. I learned from it that every good and,
alas! every evil act we do may slumber unforgotten even in some earthly
record.  I got a new lesson in that humanity which our sharp race finds
it so hard to learn.  The poor widow, fighting hard to feed and clothe
and educate her children, had not forgotten the poorer ancient maidens. I
remembered it the other day, as I stood by her place of rest, and I felt
sure that it was remembered elsewhere.  I know there are prettier words
than pudding, but I can't help it,--the pudding went upon the record, I
feel sure, with the mite which was cast into the treasury by that other
poor widow whose deed the world shall remember forever, and with the
coats and garments which the good women cried over, when Tabitha, called
by interpretation Dorcas, lay dead in the upper chamber, with her
charitable needlework strewed around her.

--Such was the Book of the Maiden Sisters.  You will believe me more
readily now when I tell you that I found the soul of Iris in the one that
lay open before me.  Sometimes it was a poem that held it, sometimes a
drawing, angel, arabesque, caricature, or a mere hieroglyphic symbol of
which I could make nothing.  A rag of cloud on one page, as I remember,
with a streak of red zigzagging out of it across the paper as naturally
as a crack runs through a China bowl.  On the next page a dead
bird,--some little favorite, I suppose; for it was worked out with a
special love, and I saw on the leaf that sign with which once or twice in
my life I have had a letter sealed,--a round spot where the paper is
slightly corrugated, and, if there is writing there, the letters are
somewhat faint and blurred.  Most of the pages were surrounded with
emblematic traceries.  It was strange to me at first to see how often she
introduced those homelier wild-flowers which we call weeds,--for it
seemed there was none of them too humble for her to love, and none too
little cared for by Nature to be without its beauty for her artist eye
and pencil.  By the side of the garden-flowers,--of Spring's curled
darlings, the hyacinths, of rosebuds, dear to sketching maidens, of
flower-de-luces and morning-glories, nay, oftener than these, and more
tenderly caressed by the colored brush that rendered them,--were those
common growths which fling themselves to be crushed under our feet and
our wheels, making themselves so cheap in this perpetual martyrdom that
we forget each of them is a ray of the Divine beauty.

Yellow japanned buttercups and star-disked dandelions,--just as we see
them lying in the grass, like sparks that have leaped from the kindling
sun of summer; the profuse daisy-like flower which whitens the fields, to
the great disgust of liberal shepherds, yet seems fair to loving eyes,
with its button-like mound of gold set round with milk-white rays; the
tall-stemmed succory, setting its pale blue flowers aflame, one after
another, sparingly, as the lights are kindled in the candelabra of
decaying palaces where the heirs of dethroned monarchs are dying out; the
red and white clovers, the broad, flat leaves of the plantain,--"the
white man's foot," as the Indians called it,--the wiry, jointed stems of
that iron creeping plant which we call "knot-grass," and which loves its
life so dearly that it is next to impossible to murder it with a hoe, as
it clings to the cracks of the pavement;--all these plants, and many
more, she wove into her fanciful garlands and borders.--On one of the
pages were some musical notes.  I touched them from curiosity on a piano
belonging to one of our boarders.  Strange!  There are passages that I
have heard before, plaintive, full of some hidden meaning, as if they
were gasping for words to interpret them.  She must have heard the
strains that have so excited my curiosity, coming from my neighbor's
chamber.  The illuminated border she had traced round the page that held
these notes took the place of the words they seemed to be aching for.
Above, a long monotonous sweep of waves, leaden-hued, anxious and jaded
and sullen, if you can imagine such an expression in water.  On one side
an Alpine needle, as it were, of black basalt, girdled with snow.  On the
other a threaded waterfall. The red morning-tint that shone in the drops
had a strange look,--one would say the cliff was bleeding;--perhaps she
did not mean it. Below, a stretch of sand, and a solitary bird of prey,
with his wings spread over some unseen object.--And on the very next page
a procession wound along, after the fashion of that on the title-page of
Fuller's "Holy War," in which I recognized without difficulty every
boarder at our table in all the glory of the most resplendent
caricature--three only excepted,--the Little Gentleman, myself, and one
other.

I confess I did expect to see something that would remind me of the
girl's little deformed neighbor, if not portraits of him.--There is a
left arm again, though;--no,--that is from the "Fighting Gladiator," the
"Jeune Heros combattant" of the Louvre;--there is the broad ring of the
shield.  From a cast, doubtless.  [The separate casts of the
"Gladiator's" arm look immense; but in its place the limb looks light,
almost slender,--such is the perfection of that miraculous marble.  I
never felt as if I touched the life of the old Greeks until I looked on
that statue.]--Here is something very odd, to be sure.  An Eden of all
the humped and crooked creatures!  What could have been in her head when
she worked out such a fantasy?  She has contrived to give them all beauty
or dignity or melancholy grace.  A Bactrian camel lying under a palm.  A
dromedary flashing up the sands,--spray of the dry ocean sailed by the
"ship of the desert."  A herd of buffaloes, uncouth, shaggy-maned, heavy
in the forehand, light in the hind-quarter.  [The buffalo is the lion of
the ruminants.] And there is a Norman horse, with his huge, rough collar,
echoing, as it were, the natural form of the other beast. And here are
twisted serpents; and stately swans, with answering curves in their bowed
necks, as if they had snake's blood under their white feathers; and
grave, high-shouldered herons standing on one foot like cripples, and
looking at life round them with the cold stare of monumental effigies.--A
very odd page indeed!  Not a creature in it without a curve or a twist,
and not one of them a mean figure to look at.  You can make your own
comment; I am fanciful, you know.  I believe she is trying to idealize
what we vulgarly call deformity, which she strives to look at in the
light of one of Nature's eccentric curves, belonging to her system of
beauty, as the hyperbola, and parabola belong to the conic sections,
though we cannot see them as symmetrical and entire figures, like the
circle and ellipse.  At any rate, I cannot help referring this paradise
of twisted spines to some idea floating in her head connected with her
friend whom Nature has warped in the moulding.--That is nothing to
another transcendental fancy of mine.  I believe her soul thinks itself
in his little crooked body at times,--if it does not really get freed or
half freed from her own.  Did you ever see a case of catalepsy?  You know
what I mean,--transient loss of sense, will, and motion; body and limbs
taking any position in which they are put, as if they belonged to a
lay-figure.  She had been talking with him and listening to him one day
when the boarders moved from the table nearly all at once.  But she sat
as before, her cheek resting on her hand, her amber eyes wide open and
still.  I went to her, she was breathing as usual, and her heart was
beating naturally enough,--but she did not answer.  I bent her arm; it
was as plastic as softened wax, and kept the place I gave it.--This will
never do, though, and I sprinkled a few drops of water on her forehead.
She started and looked round.--I have been in a dream,--she said;--I
feel as if all my strength were in this arm;--give me your hand!--She
took my right hand in her left, which looked soft and white enough,
but--Good Heaven!  I believe she will crack my bones!  All the nervous
power in her body must have flashed through those muscles; as when a
crazy lady snaps her iron window-bars,--she who could hardly glove
herself when in her common health.  Iris turned pale, and the tears came
to her eyes;--she saw she had given pain.  Then she trembled, and might
have fallen but for me;--the poor little soul had been in one of those
trances that belong to the spiritual pathology of higher natures, mostly
those of women.

To come back to this wondrous book of Iris.  Two pages faced each other
which I took for symbolical expressions of two states of mind. On the
left hand, a bright blue sky washed over the page, specked with a single
bird.  No trace of earth, but still the winged creature seemed to be
soaring upward and upward.  Facing it, one of those black dungeons such
as Piranesi alone of all men has pictured. I am sure she must have seen
those awful prisons of his, out of which the Opium-Eater got his
nightmare vision, described by another as "cemeteries of departed
greatness, where monstrous and forbidden things are crawling and twining
their slimy convolutions among mouldering bones, broken sculpture, and
mutilated inscriptions." Such a black dungeon faced the page that held
the blue sky and the single bird; at the bottom of it something was
coiled,--what, and whether meant for dead or alive, my eyes could not
make out.

I told you the young girl's soul was in this book.  As I turned over the
last leaves I could not help starting.  There were all sorts of faces
among the arabesques which laughed and scowled in the borders that ran
round the pages.  They had mostly the outline of childish or womanly or
manly beauty, without very distinct individuality. But at last it seemed
to me that some of them were taking on a look not wholly unfamiliar to
me; there were features that did not seem new.--Can it be so?  Was there
ever such innocence in a creature so full of life?  She tells her heart's
secrets as a three-years-old child betrays itself without need of being
questioned!  This was no common miss, such as are turned out in scores
from the young-lady-factories, with parchments warranting them
accomplished and virtuous,--in case anybody should question the fact.  I
began to understand her;--and what is so charming as to read the secret
of a real femme incomprise?--for such there are, though they are not the
ones who think themselves uncomprehended women.

Poets are never young, in one sense.  Their delicate ear hears the
far-off whispers of eternity, which coarser souls must travel towards for
scores of years before their dull sense is touched by them.  A moment's
insight is sometimes worth a life's experience.  I have frequently seen
children, long exercised by pain and exhaustion, whose features had a
strange look of advanced age.  Too often one meets such in our charitable
institutions.  Their faces are saddened and wrinkled, as if their few
summers were threescore years and ten.

And so, many youthful poets have written as if their hearts were old
before their time; their pensive morning twilight has been as cool and
saddening as that of evening in more common lives.  The profound
melancholy of those lines of Shelley,

     "I could lie down like a tired child
      And weep away the life of care
      Which I have borne and yet must bear."

came from a heart, as he says, "too soon grown old,"--at twenty-six
years, as dull people count time, even when they talk of poets.

I know enough to be prepared for an exceptional nature,--only this gift
of the hand in rendering every thought in form and color, as well as in
words, gives a richness to this young girl's alphabet of feeling and
imagery that takes me by surprise.  And then besides, and most of all, I
am puzzled at her sudden and seemingly easy confidence in me.  Perhaps I
owe it to my--Well, no matter!  How one must love the editor who first
calls him the venerable So-and-So!

--I locked the book and sighed as I laid it down.  The world is always
ready to receive talent with open arms.  Very often it does not know what
to do with genius.  Talent is a docile creature.  It bows its head meekly
while the world slips the collar over it.  It backs into the shafts like
a lamb.  It draws its load cheerfully, and is patient of the bit and of
the whip.  But genius is always impatient of its harness; its wild blood
makes it hard to train.

Talent seems, at first, in one sense, higher than genius,--namely, that
it is more uniformly and absolutely submitted to the will, and therefore
more distinctly human in its character.  Genius, on the other hand, is
much more like those instincts which govern the admirable movements of
the lower creatures, and therefore seems to have something of the lower
or animal character.  A goose flies by a chart which the Royal
Geographical Society could not mend.  A poet, like the goose, sails
without visible landmarks to unexplored regions of truth, which
philosophy has yet to lay down on its atlas. The philosopher gets his
track by observation; the poet trusts to his inner sense, and makes the
straighter and swifter line.

And yet, to look at it in another light, is not even the lowest instinct
more truly divine than any voluntary human act done by the suggestion of
reason?  What is a bee's architecture but an unobstructed divine
thought?--what is a builder's approximative rule but an obstructed
thought of the Creator, a mutilated and imperfect copy of some absolute
rule Divine Wisdom has established, transmitted through a human soul as
an image through clouded glass?

Talent is a very common family-trait; genius belongs rather to
individuals;--just as you find one giant or one dwarf in a family, but
rarely a whole brood of either.  Talent is often to be envied, and genius
very commonly to be pitied.  It stands twice the chance of the other of
dying in hospital, in jail, in debt, in bad repute. It is a perpetual
insult to mediocrity; its every word is a trespass against somebody's
vested ideas,--blasphemy against somebody's O'm, or intangible private
truth.

--What is the use of my weighing out antitheses in this way, like a
rhetorical grocer?--You know twenty men of talent, who are making their
way in the world; you may, perhaps, know one man of genius, and very
likely do not want to know any more.  For a divine instinct, such as
drives the goose southward and the poet heavenward, is a hard thing to
manage, and proves too strong for many whom it possesses.  It must have
been a terrible thing to have a friend like Chatterton or Burns.  And
here is a being who certainly has more than talent, at once poet and
artist in tendency, if not yet fairly developed,--a woman, too;--and
genius grafted on womanhood is like to overgrow it and break its stem, as
you may see a grafted fruit-tree spreading over the stock which cannot
keep pace with its evolution.

I think now you know something of this young person.  She wants nothing
but an atmosphere to expand in.  Now and then one meets with a nature for
which our hard, practical New England life is obviously utterly
incompetent.  It comes up, as a Southern seed, dropped by accident in one
of our gardens, finds itself trying to grow and blow into flower among
the homely roots and the hardy shrubs that surround it.  There is no
question that certain persons who are born among us find themselves many
degrees too far north.  Tropical by organization, they cannot fight for
life with our eastern and northwestern breezes without losing the color
and fragrance into which their lives would have blossomed in the latitude
of myrtles and oranges.  Strange effects are produced by suffering any
living thing to be developed under conditions such as Nature had not
intended for it.  A French physiologist confined some tadpoles under
water in the dark.  Removed from the natural stimulus of light, they did
not develop legs and arms at the proper period of their growth, and so
become frogs; they swelled and spread into gigantic tadpoles. I have seen
a hundred colossal human tadpoles, overgrown Zarvce or embryos; nay, I am
afraid we Protestants should look on a considerable proportion of the
Holy Father's one hundred and thirty-nine millions as spiritual larvae,
sculling about in the dark by the aid of their caudal extremities,
instead of standing on their legs, and breathing by gills, instead of
taking the free air of heaven into the lungs made to receive it.  Of
course we never try to keep young souls in the tadpole state, for fear
they should get a pair or two of legs by-and-by and jump out of the pool
where they have been bred and fed!  Never!  Never.  Never?

Now to go back to our plant.  You may know, that, for the earlier stages
of development of almost any vegetable, you only want air, water, light,
and warmth.  But by-and-by, if it is to have special complex principles
as a part of its organization, they must be supplied by the soil;--your
pears will crack, if the root of the tree gets no iron,--your
asparagus-bed wants salt as much as you do. Just at the period of
adolescence, the mind often suddenly begins to come into flower and to
set its fruit.  Then it is that many young natures, having exhausted the
spiritual soil round them of all it contains of the elements they demand,
wither away, undeveloped and uncolored, unless they are transplanted.

Pray for these dear young souls!  This is the second natural birth;--for
I do not speak of those peculiar religious experiences which form the
point of transition in many lives between the consciousness of a general
relation to the Divine nature and a special personal relation.  The
litany should count a prayer for them in the list of its supplications;
masses should be said for them as for souls in purgatory; all good
Christians should remember them as they remember those in peril through
travel or sickness or in warfare.

I would transport this child to Rome at once, if I had my will.  She
should ripen under an Italian sun.  She should walk under the frescoed
vaults of palaces, until her colors deepened to those of Venetian
beauties, and her forms were perfected into rivalry with the Greek
marbles, and the east wind was out of her soil.  Has she not exhausted
this lean soil of the elements her growing nature requires?

I do not know.  The magnolia grows and comes into full flower on Cape
Ann, many degrees out of its proper region.  I was riding once along that
delicious road between the hills and the sea, when we passed a thicket
where there seemed to be a chance of finding it. In five minutes I had
fallen on the trees in full blossom, and filled my arms with the sweet,
resplendent flowers.  I could not believe I was in our cold, northern
Essex, which, in the dreary season when I pass its slate-colored,
unpainted farm-houses, and huge, square, windy, 'squire-built "mansions,"
looks as brown and unvegetating as an old rug with its patterns all
trodden out and the colored fringe worn from all its border.

If the magnolia can bloom in northern New England, why should not a poet
or a painter come to his full growth here just as well?  Yes, but if the
gorgeous tree-flower is rare, and only as if by a freak of Nature springs
up in a single spot among the beeches and alders, is there not as much
reason to think the perfumed flower of imaginative genius will find it
hard to be born and harder to spread its leaves in the clear, cold
atmosphere of our ultra-temperate zone of humanity?

Take the poet.  On the one hand, I believe that a person with the
poetical faculty finds material everywhere.  The grandest objects of
sense and thought are common to all climates and civilizations.  The sky,
the woods, the waters, the storms, life, death love, the hope and vision
of eternity,--these are images that write themselves in poetry in every
soul which has anything of the divine gift.

On the other hand, there is such a thing as a lean, impoverished life, in
distinction from a rich and suggestive one.  Which our common New England
life might be considered, I will not decide.  But there are some things I
think the poet misses in our western Eden. I trust it is not unpatriotic
to mention them in this point of view as they come before us in so many
other aspects.

There is no sufficient flavor of humanity in the soil out of which we
grow.  At Cantabridge, near the sea, I have once or twice picked up an
Indian arrowhead in a fresh furrow.  At Canoe Meadow, in the Berkshire
Mountains, I have found Indian arrowheads.  So everywhere Indian
arrowheads.  Whether a hundred or a thousand years old, who knows? who
cares?  There is no history to the red race,--there is hardly an
individual in it;--a few instincts on legs and holding a tomahawk--there
is the Indian of all time.  The story of one red ant is the story of all
red ants.  So, the poet, in trying to wing his way back through the life
that has kindled, flitted, and faded along our watercourses and on our
southern hillsides for unknown generations, finds nothing to breathe or
fly in; he meets

    "A vast vacuity! all unawares,
     Fluttering his pennons vain, plumb down he drops
     Ten thousand fathom deep."

But think of the Old World,--that part of it which is the seat of ancient
civilization!  The stakes of the Britons' stockades are still standing in
the bed of the Thames.  The ploughman turns up an old Saxon's bones, and
beneath them is a tessellated pavement of the time of the Caesars.  In
Italy, the works of mediaeval Art seem to be of yesterday,--Rome, under
her kings, is but an intruding newcomer, as we contemplate her in the
shadow of the Cyclopean walls of Fiesole or Volterra.  It makes a man
human to live on these old humanized soils.  He cannot help marching in
step with his kind in the rear of such a procession.  They say a dead
man's hand cures swellings, if laid on them.  There is nothing like the
dead cold hand of the Past to take down our tumid egotism and lead us
into the solemn flow of the life of our race.  Rousseau came out of one
of his sad self-torturing fits, as he cast his eye on the arches of the
old Roman aqueduct, the Pont du Gard.

I am far from denying that there is an attraction in a thriving railroad
village.  The new "depot," the smartly-painted pine houses, the spacious
brick hotel, the white meeting-house, and the row of youthful and leggy
trees before it, are exhilarating.  They speak of progress, and the time
when there shall be a city, with a His Honor the Mayor, in the place of
their trim but transient architectural growths.  Pardon me, if I prefer
the pyramids.  They seem to me crystals formed from a stronger solution
of humanity than the steeple of the new meeting-house.  I may be wrong,
but the Tiber has a voice for me, as it whispers to the piers of the Pons
Alius, even more full of meaning than my well-beloved Charles eddying
round the piles of West Boston Bridge.

Then, again, we Yankees are a kind of gypsies,--a mechanical and
migratory race.  A poet wants a home.  He can dispense with an
apple-parer and a reaping-machine.  I feel this more for others than for
myself, for the home of my birth and childhood has been as yet exempted
from the change which has invaded almost everything around it.

--Pardon me a short digression.  To what small things our memory and our
affections attach themselves!  I remember, when I was a child, that one
of the girls planted some Star-of-Bethlehem bulbs in the southwest corner
of our front-yard.  Well, I left the paternal roof and wandered in other
lands, and learned to think in the words of strange people.  But after
many years, as I looked on the little front-yard again, it occurred to me
that there used to be some Star-of-Bethlehems in the southwest corner.
The grass was tall there, and the blade of the plant is very much like
grass, only thicker and glossier.  Even as Tully parted the briers and
brambles when he hunted for the sphere-containing cylinder that marked
the grave of Archimedes, so did I comb the grass with my fingers for my
monumental memorial-flower.  Nature had stored my keepsake tenderly in
her bosom; the glossy, faintly streaked blades were there; they are there
still, though they never flower, darkened as they are by the shade of the
elms and rooted in the matted turf.

Our hearts are held down to our homes by innumerable fibres, trivial as
that I have just recalled; but Gulliver was fixed to the soil, you
remember, by pinning his head a hair at a time.  Even a stone with a
whitish band crossing it, belonging to the pavement of the back-yard,
insisted on becoming one of the talismans of memory. This intussusception
of the ideas of inanimate objects, and their faithful storing away among
the sentiments, are curiously prefigured in the material structure of the
thinking centre itself.  In the very core of the brain, in the part where
Des Cartes placed the soul, is a small mineral deposit, consisting, as I
have seen it in the microscope, of grape-like masses of crystalline
matter.

But the plants that come up every year in the same place, like the
Star-of-Bethlehems, of all the lesser objects, give me the liveliest
home-feeling.  Close to our ancient gambrel-roofed house is the dwelling
of pleasant old Neighbor Walrus.  I remember the sweet honeysuckle that I
saw in flower against the wall of his house a few months ago, as long as
I remember the sky and stars.  That clump of peonies, butting their
purple heads through the soil every spring in just the same circle, and
by-and-by unpacking their hard balls of buds in flowers big enough to
make a double handful of leaves, has come up in just that place, Neighbor
Walrus tells me, for more years than I have passed on this planet.  It is
a rare privilege in our nomadic state to find the home of one's childhood
and its immediate neighborhood thus unchanged.  Many born poets, I am
afraid, flower poorly in song, or not at all, because they have been too
often transplanted.

Then a good many of our race are very hard and unimaginative;--their
voices have nothing caressing; their movements are as of machinery
without elasticity or oil.  I wish it were fair to print a letter a young
girl, about the age of our Iris, wrote a short time since.  "I am *** ***
***," she says, and tells her whole name outright.  Ah!--said I, when I
read that first frank declaration,--you are one of the right sort!--She
was.  A winged creature among close-clipped barn door fowl.  How tired
the poor girl was of the dull life about her,--the old woman's "skeleton
hand" at the window opposite, drawing her curtains,--"Ma'am shooing away
the hens,"--the vacuous country eyes staring at her as only country eyes
can stare,--a routine of mechanical duties, and the soul's
half-articulated cry for sympathy, without an answer!  Yes,--pray for
her, and for all such!  Faith often cures their longings; but it is so
hard to give a soul to heaven that has not first been trained in the
fullest and sweetest human affections!  Too often they fling their hearts
away on unworthy objects.  Too often they pine in a secret discontent,
which spreads its leaden cloud over the morning of their youth.  The
immeasurable distance between one of these delicate natures and the
average youths among whom is like to be her only choice makes one's heart
ache.  How many women are born too finely organized in sense and soul for
the highway they must walk with feet unshod!  Life is adjusted to the
wants of the stronger sex.  There are plenty of torrents to be crossed in
its journey; but their stepping-stones are measured by the stride of man,
and not of woman.

Women are more subject than men to atrophy of the heart.  So says the
great medical authority, Laennec.  Incurable cases of this kind used to
find their hospitals in convents.  We have the disease in New
England,--but not the hospitals.  I don't like to think of it. I will not
believe our young Iris is going to die out in this way. Providence will
find her some great happiness, or affliction, or duty,--and which would
be best for her, I cannot tell.  One thing is sure: the interest she
takes in her little neighbor is getting to be more engrossing than ever.
Something is the matter with him, and she knows it, and I think worries
herself about it.

I wonder sometimes how so fragile and distorted a frame has kept the
fiery spirit that inhabits it so long its tenant.  He accounts for it in
his own way.

The air of the Old World is good for nothing, he said, one day.--Used
up, Sir,--breathed over and over again.  You must come to this side, Sir,
for an atmosphere fit to breathe nowadays.  Did not worthy Mr. Higginson
say that a breath of New England's air is better than a sup of Old
England's ale?  I ought to have died when I was a boy, Sir; but I could
n't die in this Boston air,--and I think I shall have to go to New York
one of these days, when it's time for me to drop this bundle,--or to New
Orleans, where they have the yellow fever,--or to Philadelphia, where
they have so many doctors.

This was some time ago; but of late he has seemed, as I have before said,
to be ailing.  An experienced eye, such as I think I may call mine, can
tell commonly whether a man is going to die, or not, long before he or
his friends are alarmed about him.  I don't like it.

Iris has told me that the Scottish gift of second-sight runs in her
family, and that she is afraid she has it.  Those who are so endowed look
upon a well man and see a shroud wrapt about him.  According to the
degree to which it covers him, his death will be near or more remote.  It
is an awful faculty; but science gives one too much like it.  Luckily for
our friends, most of us who have the scientific second-sight school
ourselves not to betray our knowledge by word or look.

Day by day, as the Little Gentleman comes to the table, it seems to me
that the shadow of some approaching change falls darker and darker over
his countenance.  Nature is struggling with something, and I am afraid
she is under in the wrestling-match.  You do not care much, perhaps, for
my particular conjectures as to the nature of his difficulty.  I should
say, however, from the sudden flushes to which he is subject, and certain
other marks which, as an expert, I know how to interpret, that his heart
was in trouble; but then he presses his hand to the right side, as if
there were the centre of his uneasiness.

When I say difficulty about the heart, I do not mean any of those
sentimental maladies of that organ which figure more largely in romances
than on the returns which furnish our Bills of Mortality. I mean some
actual change in the organ itself, which may carry him off by slow and
painful degrees, or strike him down with one huge pang and only time for
a single shriek,--as when the shot broke through the brave Captain
Nolan's breast, at the head of the Light Brigade at Balaklava, and with a
loud cry he dropped dead from his saddle.

I thought it only fair to say something of what I apprehended to some who
were entitled to be warned.  The landlady's face fell when I mentioned my
fears.

Poor man!--she said.--And will leave the best room empty!  Has n't he got
any sisters or nieces or anybody to see to his things, if he should be
took away?  Such a sight of cases, full of everything! Never thought of
his failin' so suddin.  A complication of diseases, she expected.
Liver-complaint one of 'em?

After this first involuntary expression of the too natural selfish
feelings, (which we must not judge very harshly, unless we happen to be
poor widows ourselves, with children to keep filled, covered, and
taught,--rents high,--beef eighteen to twenty cents per pound,)--after
this first squeak of selfishness, followed by a brief movement of
curiosity, so invariable in mature females, as to the nature of the
complaint which threatens the life of a friend or any person who may
happen to be mentioned as ill,--the worthy soul's better feelings
struggled up to the surface, and she grieved for the doomed invalid,
until a tear or two came forth and found their way down a channel worn
for them since the early days of her widowhood.

Oh, this dreadful, dreadful business of being the prophet of evil! Of all
the trials which those who take charge of others' health and lives have
to undergo, this is the most painful.  It is all so plain to the
practised eye!--and there is the poor wife, the doting mother, who has
never suspected anything, or at least has clung always to the hope which
you are just going to wrench away from her!--I must tell Iris that I
think her poor friend is in a precarious state.  She seems nearer to him
than anybody.

I did tell her.  Whatever emotion it produced, she kept a still face,
except, perhaps, a little trembling of the lip.--Could I be certain that
there was any mortal complaint?--Why, no, I could not be certain; but it
looked alarming to me.--He shall have some of my life,--she said.

I suppose this to have been a fancy of hers, or a kind of magnetic power
she could give out;--at any rate, I cannot help thinking she wills her
strength away from herself, for she has lost vigor and color from that
day.  I have sometimes thought he gained the force she lost; but this may
have been a whim, very probably.

One day she came suddenly to me, looking deadly pale.  Her lips moved, as
if she were speaking; but I could not at first hear a word.  Her hair
looked strangely, as if lifting itself, and her eyes were full of wild
light.  She sunk upon a chair, and I thought was falling into one of her
trances.  Something had frozen her blood with fear; I thought, from what
she said, half audibly, that she believed she had seen a shrouded figure.

That night, at about eleven o'clock, I was sent for to see the Little
Gentleman, who was taken suddenly ill.  Bridget, the servant, went before
me with a light.  The doors were both unfastened, and I found myself
ushered, without hindrance, into the dim light of the mysterious
apartment I had so longed to enter.

I found these stanzas in the young girl's book among many others.  I give
them as characterizing the tone of her sadder moments.


               UNDER THE VIOLETS.

     Her hands are cold; her face is white;
     No more her pulses come and go;
     Her eyes are shut to life and light;
     Fold the white vesture, snow on snow,
     And lay her where the violets blow.

     But not beneath a graven stone,
     To plead for tears with alien eyes;
     A slender cross of wood alone
     Shall say, that here a maiden lies
     In peace beneath the peaceful skies.

     And gray old trees of hugest limb
     Shall wheel their circling shadows round
     To make the scorching sunlight dim
     That drinks the greenness from the ground,
     And drop their dead leaves on her mound.

     When o'er their boughs the squirrels run,
     And through their leaves the robins call,
     And, ripening in the autumn sun,
     The acorns and the chestnuts fall,
     Doubt not that she will heed them all.

     For her the morning choir shall sing
     Its matins from the branches high,
     And every minstrel voice of spring,
     That trills beneath the April sky,
     Shall greet her with its earliest cry.

     When, turning round their dial-track,
     Eastward the lengthening shadows pass,
     Her little mourners, clad in black,
     The crickets, sliding through the grass,
     Shall pipe for her an evening mass.

     At last the rootlets of the trees
     Shall find the prison where she lies,
     And bear the buried dust they seize
     In leaves and blossoms to the skies.
     So may the soul that warmed it rise!

     If any, born of kindlier blood,
     Should ask, What maiden lies below?
     Say only this: A tender bud,
     That tried to blossom in the snow,
     Lies withered where the violets blow.




XI

You will know, perhaps, in the course of half an hour's reading, what has
been haunting my hours of sleep and waking for months.  I cannot tell, of
course, whether you are a nervous person or not. If, however, you are
such a person,--if it is late at night,--if all the rest of the household
have gone off to bed,--if the wind is shaking your windows as if a human
hand were rattling the sashes,--if your candle or lamp is low and will
soon burn out,--let me advise you to take up some good quiet sleepy
volume, or attack the "Critical Notices" of the last Quarterly and leave
this to be read by daylight, with cheerful voices round, and people near
by who would hear you, if you slid from your chair and came down in a
lump on the floor.

I do not say that your heart will beat as mine did, I am willing to
confess, when I entered the dim chamber.  Did I not tell you that I was
sensitive and imaginative, and that I had lain awake with thinking what
were the strange movements and sounds which I heard late at night in my
little neighbor's apartment?  It had come to that pass that I was truly
unable to separate what I had really heard from what I had dreamed in
those nightmares to which I have been subject, as before mentioned.  So,
when I walked into the room, and Bridget, turning back, closed the door
and left me alone with its tenant, I do believe you could have grated a
nutmeg on my skin, such a "goose-flesh" shiver ran over it.  It was not
fear, but what I call nervousness,--unreasoning, but irresistible; as
when, for instance, one looking at the sun going down says, "I will count
fifty before it disappears"; and as he goes on and it becomes doubtful
whether he will reach the number, he gets strangely flurried, and his
imagination pictures life and death and heaven and hell as the issues
depending on the completion or non-completion of the fifty he is
counting.  Extreme curiosity will excite some people as much as fear, or
what resembles fear, acts on some other less impressible natures.

I may find myself in the midst of strange facts in this little conjurer's
room.  Or, again, there may be nothing in this poor invalid's chamber but
some old furniture, such as they say came over in the Mayflower.  All
this is just what I mean to, find out while I am looking at the Little
Gentleman, who has suddenly become my patient.  The simplest things turn
out to be unfathomable mysteries; the most mysterious appearances prove
to be the most commonplace objects in disguise.

I wonder whether the boys who live in Roxbury and Dorchester are ever
moved to tears or filled with silent awe as they look upon the rocks and
fragments of "puddingstone" abounding in those localities. I have my
suspicions that those boys "heave a stone" or "fire a brickbat," composed
of the conglomerate just mentioned, without any more tearful or
philosophical contemplations than boys of less favored regions expend on
the same performance.  Yet a lump of puddingstone is a thing to look at,
to think about, to study over, to dream upon, to go crazy with, to beat
one's brains out against. Look at that pebble in it.  From what cliff was
it broken?  On what beach rolled by the waves of what ocean?  How and
when imbedded in soft ooze, which itself became stone, and by-and-by was
lifted into bald summits and steep cliffs, such as you may see on
Meetinghouse-Hill any day--yes, and mark the scratches on their faces
left when the boulder-carrying glaciers planed the surface of the
continent with such rough tools that the storms have not worn the marks
out of it with all the polishing of ever so many thousand years?

Or as you pass a roadside ditch or pool in springtime, take from it any
bit of stick or straw which has lain undisturbed for a time. Some little
worm-shaped masses of clear jelly containing specks are fastened to the
stick: eggs of a small snail-like shell-fish.  One of these specks
magnified proves to be a crystalline sphere with an opaque mass in its
centre.  And while you are looking, the opaque mass begins to stir, and
by-and-by slowly to turn upon its axis like a forming planet,--life
beginning in the microcosm, as in the great worlds of the firmament, with
the revolution that turns the surface in ceaseless round to the source of
life and light.

A pebble and the spawn of a mollusk!  Before you have solved their
mysteries, this earth where you first saw them may be a vitrified slag,
or a vapor diffused through the planetary spaces.  Mysteries are common
enough, at any rate, whatever the boys in Roxbury and Dorchester think of
"brickbats" and the spawn of creatures that live in roadside puddles.

But then a great many seeming mysteries are relatively perfectly plain,
when we can get at them so as to turn them over.  How many ghosts that
"thick men's blood with cold" prove to be shirts hung out to dry!  How
many mermaids have been made out of seals!  How many times have
horse-mackerels been taken for the sea-serpent!

--Let me take the whole matter coolly, while I see what is the matter
with the patient.  That is what I say to myself, as I draw a chair to the
bedside.  The bed is an old-fashioned, dark mahogany four-poster.  It was
never that which made the noise of something moving.  It is too heavy to
be pushed about the room.--The Little Gentleman was sitting, bolstered up
by pillows, with his hands clasped and their united palms resting on the
back of the head, one of the three or four positions specially affected
by persons whose breathing is difficult from disease of the heart or
other causes.

Sit down, Sir,--he said,--sit down!  I have come to the hill Difficulty,
Sir, and am fighting my way up.--His speech was laborious and
interrupted.

Don't talk,--I said,--except to answer my questions.--And I proceeded to
"prospect" for the marks of some local mischief, which you know is at the
bottom of all these attacks, though we do not always find it.  I suppose
I go to work pretty much like other professional folks of my temperament.
Thus:

Wrist, if you please.--I was on his right side, but he presented his left
wrist, crossing it over the other.--I begin to count, holding watch in
left hand.  One, two, three, four,--What a handsome hand! wonder if that
splendid stone is a carbuncle.--One, two, three, four, five, six,
seven,--Can't see much, it is so dark, except one white object.--One,
two, three, four,--Hang it! eighty or ninety in the minute, I
guess.--Tongue, if you please.--Tongue is put out.  Forget to look at it,
or, rather, to take any particular notice of it;--but what is that white
object, with the long arm stretching up as if pointing to the sky, just
as Vesalius and Spigelius and those old fellows used to put their
skeletons?  I don't think anything of such objects, you know; but what
should he have it in his chamber for?  As I had found his pulse irregular
and intermittent, I took out a stethoscope, which is a pocket-spyglass
for looking into people's chests with your ears, and laid it over the
place where the heart beats.  I missed the usual beat of the organ.--How
is this?--I said,--where is your heart gone to?--He took the stethoscope
and shifted it across to the right side; there was a displacement of the
organ.--I am ill-packed,--he said;--there was no room for my heart in its
place as it is with other men.--God help him!

It is hard to draw the line between scientific curiosity and the desire
for the patient's sake to learn all the details of his condition.  I must
look at this patient's chest, and thump it and listen to it.  For this is
a case of ectopia cordis, my boy,--displacement of the heart; and it is
n't every day you get a chance to overhaul such an interesting
malformation.  And so I managed to do my duty and satisfy my curiosity at
the same time.  The torso was slight and deformed; the right arm
attenuated,--the left full, round, and of perfect symmetry.  It had run
away with the life of the other limbs,--a common trick enough of
Nature's, as I told you before.  If you see a man with legs withered from
childhood, keep out of the way of his arms, if you have a quarrel with
him.  He has the strength of four limbs in two; and if he strikes you, it
is an arm-blow plus a kick administered from the shoulder instead of the
haunch, where it should have started from.

Still examining him as a patient, I kept my eyes about me to search all
parts of the chamber and went on with the double process, as
before.--Heart hits as hard as a fist,--bellows-sound over mitral valves
(professional terms you need not attend to).--What the deuse is that long
case for?  Got his witch grandmother mummied in it? And three big
mahogany presses,--hey?--A diabolical suspicion came over me which I had
had once before,--that he might be one of our modern alchemists,--you
understand, make gold, you know, or what looks like it, sometimes with
the head of a king or queen or of Liberty to embellish one side of the
piece.--Don't I remember hearing him shut a door and lock it once?  What
do you think was kept under that lock?  Let's have another look at his
hand, to see if there are any calluses.

One can tell a man's business, if it is a handicraft, very often by just
taking a look at his open hand.  Ah!  Four calluses at the end of the
fingers of the right hand.  None on those of the left.  Ah, ha!  What do
those mean?

All this seems longer in the telling, of course, than it was in fact.
While I was making these observations of the objects around me, I was
also forming my opinion as to the kind of case with which I had to deal.

There are three wicks, you know, to the lamp of a man's life: brain,
blood, and breath.  Press the brain a little, its light goes out,
followed by both the others.  Stop the heart a minute and out go all
three of the wicks.  Choke the air out of the lungs, and presently the
fluid ceases to supply the other centres of flame, and all is soon
stagnation, cold, and darkness.  The "tripod of life" a French
physiologist called these three organs.  It is all clear enough which leg
of the tripod is going to break down here.  I could tell you exactly what
the difficulty is;--which would be as intelligible and amusing as a
watchmaker's description of a diseased timekeeper to a ploughman.  It is
enough to say, that I found just what I expected to, and that I think
this attack is only the prelude of more serious consequences,--which
expression means you very well know what.

And now the secrets of this life hanging on a thread must surely come
out.  If I have made a mystery where there was none, my suspicions will
be shamed, as they have often been before.  If there is anything strange,
my visits will clear it up.

I sat an hour or two by the side of the Little Gentleman's bed, after
giving him some henbane to quiet his brain, and some foxglove, which an
imaginative French professor has called the "Opium of the Heart."  Under
their influence he gradually fell into an uneasy, half-waking slumber,
the body fighting hard for every breath, and the mind wandering off in
strange fancies and old recollections, which escaped from his lips in
broken sentences.

--The last of 'em,--he said,--the last of 'em all,--thank God!  And the
grave he lies in will look just as well as if he had been straight.  Dig
it deep, old Martin, dig it deep,--and let it be as long as other folks'
graves.  And mind you get the sods flat, old man,--flat as ever a
straight-backed young fellow was laid under. And then, with a good tall
slab at the head, and a foot-stone six foot away from it, it'll look just
as if there was a man underneath.

A man!  Who said he was a man?  No more men of that pattern to bear his
name!--Used to be a good-looking set enough.--Where 's all the manhood
and womanhood gone to since his great-grandfather was the strongest man
that sailed out of the town of Boston, and poor Leah there the handsomest
woman in Essex, if she was a witch?

--Give me some light,--he said,--more light.  I want to see the picture.

He had started either from a dream or a wandering reverie.  I was not
unwilling to have more light in the apartment, and presently had lighted
an astral lamp that stood on a table.--He pointed to a portrait hanging
against the wall.--Look at her,--he said,--look at her!  Wasn't that a
pretty neck to slip a hangman's noose over?

The portrait was of a young woman, something more than twenty years old,
perhaps.  There were few pictures of any merit painted in New England
before the time of Smibert, and I am at a loss to know what artist could
have taken this half-length, which was evidently from life.  It was
somewhat stiff and flat, but the grace of the figure and the sweetness of
the expression reminded me of the angels of the early Florentine
painters.  She must have been of some consideration, for she was dressed
in paduasoy and lace with hanging sleeves, and the old carved frame
showed how the picture had been prized by its former owners.  A proud eye
she had, with all her sweetness.--I think it was that which hanged her,
as his strong arm hanged Minister George Burroughs;--but it may have been
a little mole on one cheek, which the artist had just hinted as a beauty
rather than a deformity.  You know, I suppose, that nursling imps addict
themselves, after the fashion of young opossums, to these little
excrescences.  "Witch-marks" were good evidence that a young woman was
one of the Devil's wet-nurses;--I should like to have seen you make fun
of them in those days!--Then she had a brooch in her bodice, that might
have been taken for some devilish amulet or other; and she wore a ring
upon one of her fingers, with a red stone in it, that flamed as if the
painter had dipped his pencil in fire;--who knows but that it was given
her by a midnight suitor fresh from that fierce element, and licensed for
a season to leave his couch of flame to tempt the unsanctified hearts of
earthly maidens and brand their cheeks with the print of his scorching
kisses?

She and I,--he said, as he looked steadfastly at the canvas,--she and I
are the last of 'em.--She will stay, and I shall go.  They never painted
me,--except when the boys used to make pictures of me with chalk on the
board-fences.  They said the doctors would want my skeleton when I was
dead.--You are my friend, if you are a doctor,--a'n't you?

I just gave him my hand.  I had not the heart to speak.

I want to lie still,--he said,--after I am put to bed upon the hill
yonder.  Can't you have a great stone laid over me, as they did over the
first settlers in the old burying-ground at Dorchester, so as to keep the
wolves from digging them up?  I never slept easy over the sod;--I should
like to lie quiet under it.  And besides,--he said, in a kind of scared
whisper,--I don't want to have my bones stared at, as my body has been.
I don't doubt I was a remarkable case; but, for God's sake, oh, for God's
sake, don't let 'em make a show of the cage I have been shut up in and
looked through the bars of for so many years.

I have heard it said that the art of healing makes men hard-hearted and
indifferent to human suffering.  I am willing to own that there is often
a professional hardness in surgeons, just as there is in
theologians,--only much less in degree than in these last.  It does not
commonly improve the sympathies of a man to be in the habit of thrusting
knives into his fellow-creatures and burning them with red-hot irons, any
more than it improves them to hold the blinding-white cantery of Gehenna
by its cool handle and score and crisp young souls with it until they are
scorched into the belief of--Transubstantiation or the Immaculate
Conception.  And, to say the plain truth, I think there are a good many
coarse people in both callings.  A delicate nature will not commonly
choose a pursuit which implies the habitual infliction of suffering, so
readily as some gentler office.  Yet, while I am writing this paragraph,
there passes by my window, on his daily errand of duty, not seeing me,
though I catch a glimpse of his manly features through the oval glass of
his chaise, as he drives by, a surgeon of skill and standing, so
friendly, so modest, so tenderhearted in all his ways, that, if he had
not approved himself at once adroit and firm, one would have said he was
of too kindly a mould to be the minister of pain, even if he were saving
pain.

You may be sure that some men, even among those who have chosen the task
of pruning their fellow-creatures, grow more and more thoughtful and
truly compassionate in the midst of their cruel experience.  They become
less nervous, but more sympathetic.  They have a truer sensibility for
others' pain, the more they study pain and disease in the light of
science.  I have said this without claiming any special growth in
humanity for myself, though I do hope I grow tenderer in my feelings as I
grow older.  At any rate, this was not a time in which professional
habits could keep down certain instincts of older date than these.

This poor little man's appeal to my humanity against the supposed
rapacity of Science, which he feared would have her "specimen," if his
ghost should walk restlessly a thousand years, waiting for his bones to
be laid in the dust, touched my heart.  But I felt bound to speak
cheerily.

--We won't die yet awhile, if we can help it,--I said,--and I trust we
can help it.  But don't be afraid; if I live longest, I will see that
your resting place is kept sacred till the dandelions and buttercups blow
over you.

He seemed to have got his wits together by this time, and to have a vague
consciousness that he might have been saying more than he meant for
anybody's ears.--I have been talking a little wild, Sir, eh? he
said.--There is a great buzzing in my head with those drops of yours, and
I doubt if my tongue has not been a little looser than I would have it,
Sir.  But I don't much want to live, Sir; that's the truth of the matter,
and it does rather please me to think that fifty years from now nobody
will know that the place where I lie does n't hold as stout and straight
a man as the best of 'em that stretch out as if they were proud of the
room they take.  You may get me well, if you can, Sir, if you think it
worth while to try; but I tell you there has been no time for this many a
year when the smell of fresh earth was not sweeter to me than all the
flowers that grow out of it.  There's no anodyne like your good clean
gravel, Sir.  But if you can keep me about awhile, and it amuses you to
try, you may show your skill upon me, if you like.  There is a pleasure
or two that I love the daylight for, and I think the night is not far
off, at best.--I believe I shall sleep now; you may leave me, and come,
if you like, in the morning.

Before I passed out, I took one more glance round the apartment. The
beautiful face of the portrait looked at me, as portraits often do, with
a frightful kind of intelligence in its eyes.  The drapery fluttered on
the still outstretched arm of the tall object near the window;--a crack
of this was open, no doubt, and some breath of wind stirred the hanging
folds.  In my excited state, I seemed to see something ominous in that
arm pointing to the heavens.  I thought of the figures in the Dance of
Death at Basle, and that other on the panels of the covered Bridge at
Lucerne, and it seemed to me that the grim mask who mingles with every
crowd and glides over every threshold was pointing the sick man to his
far home, and would soon stretch out his bony hand and lead him or drag
him on the unmeasured journey towards it.

The fancy had possession of me, and I shivered again as when I first
entered the chamber.  The picture and the shrouded shape; I saw only
these two objects.  They were enough.  The house was deadly still, and
the night-wind, blowing through an open window, struck me as from a field
of ice, at the moment I passed into the creaking corridor.  As I turned
into the common passage, a white figure, holding a lamp, stood full
before me.  I thought at first it was one of those images made to stand
in niches and hold a light in their hands.  But the illusion was
momentary, and my eyes speedily recovered from the shock of the bright
flame and snowy drapery to see that the figure was a breathing one.  It
was Iris, in one of her statue-trances.  She had come down, whether
sleeping or waking, I knew not at first, led by an instinct that told her
she was wanted,--or, possibly, having overheard and interpreted the
sound of our movements,--or, it may be, having learned from the servant
that there was trouble which might ask for a woman's hand.  I sometimes
think women have a sixth sense, which tells them that others, whom they
cannot see or hear, are in suffering.  How surely we find them at the
bedside of the dying!  How strongly does Nature plead for them, that we
should draw our first breath in their arms, as we sigh away our last upon
their faithful breasts!

With white, bare feet, her hair loosely knotted, clad as the starlight
knew her, and the morning when she rose from slumber, save that she had
twisted a scarf round her long dress, she stood still as a stone before
me, holding in one hand a lighted coil of waxtaper, and in the other a
silver goblet.  I held my own lamp close to her, as if she had been a
figure of marble, and she did not stir.  There was no breach of propriety
then, to scare the Poor Relation with and breed scandal out of.  She had
been "warned in a dream," doubtless suggested by her waking knowledge and
the sounds which had reached her exalted sense.  There was nothing more
natural than that she should have risen and girdled her waist, and
lighted her taper, and found the silver goblet with "Ex dono pupillorum"
on it, from which she had taken her milk and possets through all her
childish years, and so gone blindly out to find her place at the
bedside,--a Sister of Charity without the cap and rosary; nay, unknowing
whither her feet were leading her, and with wide blank eyes seeing
nothing but the vision that beckoned her along.--Well, I must wake her
from her slumber or trance.--I called her name, but she did not heed my
voice.

The Devil put it into my head that I would kiss one handsome young girl
before I died, and now was my chance.  She never would know it, and I
should carry the remembrance of it with me into the grave, and a rose
perhaps grow out of my dust, as a brier did out of Lord Lovers, in memory
of that immortal moment!  Would it wake her from her trance? and would
she see me in the flush of my stolen triumph, and hate and despise me
ever after?  Or should I carry off my trophy undetected, and always from
that time say to myself, when I looked upon her in the glory of youth and
the splendor of beauty, "My lips have touched those roses and made their
sweetness mine forever"? You think my cheek was flushed, perhaps, and my
eyes were glittering with this midnight flash of opportunity.  On the
contrary, I believe I was pale, very pale, and I know that I trembled.
Ah, it is the pale passions that are the fiercest,--it is the violence of
the chill that gives the measure of the fever!  The fighting-boy of our
school always turned white when he went out to a pitched battle with the
bully of some neighboring village; but we knew what his bloodless cheeks
meant,--the blood was all in his stout heart,--he was a slight boy, and
there was not enough to redden his face and fill his heart both at once.

Perhaps it is making a good deal of a slight matter, to tell the internal
conflicts in the heart of a quiet person something more than juvenile and
something less than senile, as to whether he should be guilty of an
impropriety, and, if he were, whether he would get caught in his
indiscretion.  And yet the memory of the kiss that Margaret of Scotland
gave to Alain Chartier has lasted four hundred years, and put it into the
head of many an ill-favored poet, whether Victoria, or Eugenie, would do
as much by him, if she happened to pass him when he was asleep.  And have
we ever forgotten that the fresh cheek of the young John Milton tingled
under the lips of some high-born Italian beauty, who, I believe, did not
think to leave her card by the side of the slumbering youth, but has
bequeathed the memory of her pretty deed to all coming time?  The sound
of a kiss is not so loud as that of a cannon, but its echo lasts a deal
longer.

There is one disadvantage which the man of philosophical habits of mind
suffers, as compared with the man of action.  While he is taking an
enlarged and rational view of the matter before him, he lets his chance
slip through his fingers.  Iris woke up, of her own accord, before I had
made up my mind what I was going to do about it.

When I remember how charmingly she looked, I don't blame myself at all
for being tempted; but if I had been fool enough to yield to the impulse,
I should certainly have been ashamed to tell of it.  She did not know
what to make of it, finding herself there alone, in such guise, and me
staring at her.  She looked down at her white robe and bare feet, and
colored,--then at the goblet she held in her hand, then at the taper; and
at last her thoughts seemed to clear up.

I know it all,--she said.--He is going to die, and I must go and sit by
him.  Nobody will care for him as I shall, and I have nobody else to care
for.

I assured her that nothing was needed for him that night but rest, and
persuaded her that the excitement of her presence could only do harm.
Let him sleep, and he would very probably awake better in the morning.
There was nothing to be said, for I spoke with authority; and the young
girl glided away with noiseless step and sought her own chamber.

The tremor passed away from my limbs, and the blood began to burn in my
cheeks.  The beautiful image which had so bewitched me faded gradually
from my imagination, and I returned to the still perplexing mysteries of
my little neighbor's chamber.

All was still there now.  No plaintive sounds, no monotonous murmurs, no
shutting of windows and doors at strange hours, as if something or
somebody were coming in or going out, or there was something to be hidden
in those dark mahogany presses.  Is there an inner apartment that I have
not seen?  The way in which the house is built might admit of it.  As I
thought it over, I at once imagined a Bluebeard's chamber.  Suppose, for
instance, that the narrow bookshelves to the right are really only a
masked door, such as we remember leading to the private study of one of
our most distinguished townsmen, who loved to steal away from his stately
library to that little silent cell.  If this were lighted from above, a
person or persons might pass their days there without attracting
attention from the household, and wander where they pleased at night,--to
Copp's-Hill burial-ground, if they liked,--I said to myself, laughing,
and pulling the bed-clothes over my head. There is no logic in
superstitious-fancies any more than in dreams. A she-ghost wouldn't want
an inner chamber to herself.  A live woman, with a valuable soprano
voice, wouldn't start off at night to sprain her ankles over the old
graves of the North-End cemetery.

It is all very easy for you, middle-aged reader, sitting over this page
in the broad daylight, to call me by all manner of asinine and anserine
unchristian names, because I had these fancies running through my head.
I don't care much for your abuse.  The question is not, what it is
reasonable for a man to think about, but what he actually does think
about, in the dark, and when he is alone, and his whole body seems but
one great nerve of hearing, and he sees the phosphorescent flashes of his
own eyeballs as they turn suddenly in the direction of the last strange
noise,--what he actually does think about, as he lies and recalls all the
wild stories his head is full of, his fancy hinting the most alarming
conjectures to account for the simplest facts about him, his common-sense
laughing them to scorn the next minute, but his mind still returning to
them, under one shape or another, until he gets very nervous and foolish,
and remembers how pleasant it used to be to have his mother come and tuck
him up and go and sit within call, so that she could hear him at any
minute, if he got very much scared and wanted her.  Old babies that we
are!

Daylight will clear up all that lamp-light has left doubtful.  I longed
for the morning to come, for I was more curious than ever. So, between my
fancies and anticipations, I had but a poor night of it, and came down
tired to the breakfast-table.  My visit was not to be made until after
this morning hour; there was nothing urgent, so the servant was ordered
to tell me.

It was the first breakfast at which the high chair at the side of Iris
had been unoccupied.--You might jest as well take away that chair,--said
our landlady,--he'll never want it again.  He acts like a man that 's
struck with death, 'n' I don't believe he 'll ever come out of his
chamber till he 's laid out and brought down a corpse.--These good women
do put things so plainly!  There were two or three words in her short
remark that always sober people, and suggest silence or brief moral
reflections.

--Life is dreadful uncerting,--said the Poor Relation,--and pulled in her
social tentacles to concentrate her thoughts on this fact of human
history.

--If there was anything a fellah could do,--said the young man John, so
called,--a fellah 'd like the chance o' helpin' a little cripple like
that.  He looks as if he couldn't turn over any handier than a turtle
that's laid on his back; and I guess there a'n't many people that know
how to lift better than I do.  Ask him if he don't want any watchers.  I
don't mind settin' up any more 'n a cat-owl.  I was up all night twice
last month.

[My private opinion is, that there was no small amount of punch absorbed
on those two occasions, which I think I heard of at the time];--but the
offer is a kind one, and it is n't fair to question how he would like
sitting up without the punch and the company and the songs and smoking.
He means what he says, and it would be a more considerable achievement
for him to sit quietly all night by a sick man than for a good many other
people.  I tell you this odd thing: there are a good many persons, who,
through the habit of making other folks uncomfortable, by finding fault
with all their cheerful enjoyments, at last get up a kind of hostility to
comfort in general, even in their own persons.  The correlative to loving
our neighbors as ourselves is hating ourselves as we hate our neighbors.
Look at old misers; first they starve their dependants, and then
themselves.  So I think it more for a lively young fellow to be ready to
play nurse than for one of those useful but forlorn martyrs who have
taken a spite against themselves and love to gratify it by fasting and
watching.

--The time came at last for me to make my visit.  I found Iris sitting by
the Little Gentleman's pillow.  To my disappointment, the room was
darkened.  He did not like the light, and would have the shutters kept
nearly closed.  It was good enough for me; what business had I to be
indulging my curiosity, when I had nothing to do but to exercise such
skill as I possessed for the benefit of my patient?  There was not much
to be said or done in such a case; but I spoke as encouragingly as I
could, as I think we are always bound to do.  He did not seem to pay any
very anxious attention, but the poor girl listened as if her own life and
more than her own life were depending on the words I uttered.  She
followed me out of the room, when I had got through my visit.

How long?--she said.

Uncertain.  Any time; to-day,--next week, next month,--I answered.--One
of those cases where the issue is not doubtful, but may be sudden or
slow.

The women of the house were kind, as women always are in trouble. But
Iris pretended that nobody could spare the time as well as she, and kept
her place, hour after hour, until the landlady insisted that she'd be
killin' herself, if she begun at that rate, 'n' haf to give up, if she
didn't want to be clean beat out in less 'n a week.

At the table we were graver than common.  The high chair was set back
against the wall, and a gap left between that of the young girl and her
nearest neighbor's on the right.  But the next morning, to our great
surprise, that good-looking young Marylander had very quietly moved his
own chair to the vacant place.  I thought he was creeping down that way,
but I was not prepared for a leap spanning such a tremendous parenthesis
of boarders as this change of position included.  There was no denying
that the youth and maiden were a handsome pair, as they sat side by side.
But whatever the young girl may have thought of her new neighbor she
never seemed for a moment to forget the poor little friend who had been
taken from her side.  There are women, and even girls, with whom it is of
no use to talk.  One might as well reason with a bee as to the form of
his cell, or with an oriole as to the construction of his swinging nest,
as try to stir these creatures from their own way of doing their own
work.  It was not a question with Iris, whether she was entitled by any
special relation or by the fitness of things to play the part of a nurse.
She was a wilful creature that must have her way in this matter.  And it
so proved that it called for much patience and long endurance to carry
through the duties, say rather the kind offices, the painful pleasures,
which she had chosen as her share in the household where accident had
thrown her.  She had that genius of ministration which is the special
province of certain women, marked even among their helpful sisters by a
soft, low voice, a quiet footfall, a light hand, a cheering smile, and a
ready self-surrender to the objects of their care, which such trifles as
their own food, sleep, or habits of any kind never presume to interfere
with. Day after day, and too often through the long watches of the night,
she kept her place by the pillow.

That girl will kill herself over me, Sir,--said the poor Little Gentleman
to me, one day,--she will kill herself, Sir, if you don't call in all the
resources of your art to get me off as soon as may be.  I shall wear her
out, Sir, with sitting in this close chamber and watching when she ought
to be sleeping, if you leave me to the care of Nature without dosing me.

This was rather strange pleasantry, under the circumstances.  But there
are certain persons whose existence is so out of parallel with the larger
laws in the midst of which it is moving, that life becomes to them as
death and death as life.--How am I getting along?--he said, another
morning.  He lifted his shrivelled hand, with the death's-head ring on
it, and looked at it with a sad sort of complacency.  By this one
movement, which I have seen repeatedly of late, I know that his thoughts
have gone before to another condition, and that he is, as it were,
looking back on the infirmities of the body as accidents of the past.
For, when he was well, one might see him often looking at the handsome
hand with the flaming jewel on one of its fingers.  The single
well-shaped limb was the source of that pleasure which in some form or
other Nature almost always grants to her least richly endowed children.
Handsome hair, eyes, complexion, feature, form, hand, foot, pleasant
voice, strength, grace, agility, intelligence,--how few there are that
have not just enough of one at least of these gifts to show them that the
good Mother, busy with her millions of children, has not quite forgotten
them!  But now he was thinking of that other state, where, free from all
mortal impediments, the memory of his sorrowful burden should be only as
that of the case he has shed to the insect whose "deep-damasked wings"
beat off the golden dust of the lily-anthers, as he flutters in the
ecstasy of his new life over their full-blown summer glories.

No human being can rest for any time in a state of equilibrium, where the
desire to live and that to depart just balance each other. If one has a
house, which he has lived and always means to live in, he pleases himself
with the thought of all the conveniences it offers him, and thinks little
of its wants and imperfections.  But once having made up his mind to move
to a better, every incommodity starts out upon him, until the very
ground-plan of it seems to have changed in his mind, and his thoughts and
affections, each one of them packing up its little bundle of
circumstances, have quitted their several chambers and nooks and migrated
to the new home, long before its apartments are ready to receive their
coming tenant.  It is so with the body.  Most persons have died before
they expire,--died to all earthly longings, so that the last breath is
only, as it were, the locking of the door of the already deserted
mansion.  The fact of the tranquillity with which the great majority of
dying persons await this locking of those gates of life through which its
airy angels have been going and coming, from the moment of the first cry,
is familiar to those who have been often called upon to witness the last
period of life.  Almost always there is a preparation made by Nature for
unearthing a soul, just as on the smaller scale there is for the removal
of a milktooth.  The roots which hold human life to earth are absorbed
before it is lifted from its place.  Some of the dying are weary and want
rest, the idea of which is almost inseparable in the universal mind from
death.  Some are in pain, and want to be rid of it, even though the
anodyne be dropped, as in the legend, from the sword of the Death-Angel.
Some are stupid, mercifully narcotized that they may go to sleep without
long tossing about.  And some are strong in faith and hope, so that, as
they draw near the next world, they would fair hurry toward it, as the
caravan moves faster over the sands when the foremost travellers send
word along the file that water is in sight.  Though each little party
that follows in a foot-track of its own will have it that the water to
which others think they are hastening is a mirage, not the less has it
been true in all ages and for human beings of every creed which
recognized a future, that those who have fallen worn out by their march
through the Desert have dreamed at least of a River of Life, and thought
they heard its murmurs as they lay dying.

The change from the clinging to the present to the welcoming of the
future comes very soon, for the most part, after all hope of life is
extinguished, provided this be left in good degree to Nature, and not
insolently and cruelly forced upon those who are attacked by illness, on
the strength of that odious foreknowledge often imparted by science,
before the white fruit whose core is ashes, and which we call death, has
set beneath the pallid and drooping flower of sickness.  There is a
singular sagacity very often shown in a patient's estimate of his own
vital force.  His physician knows the state of his material frame well
enough, perhaps,--that this or that organ is more or less impaired or
disintegrated; but the patient has a sense that he can hold out so much
longer,--sometimes that he must and will live for a while, though by the
logic of disease he ought to die without any delay.

The Little Gentleman continued to fail, until it became plain that his
remaining days were few.  I told the household what to expect. There was
a good deal of kind feeling expressed among the boarders, in various
modes, according to their characters and style of sympathy.  The landlady
was urgent that he should try a certain nostrum which had saved
somebody's life in jest sech a case.  The Poor Relation wanted me to
carry, as from her, a copy of "Allein's Alarm," etc.  I objected to the
title, reminding her that it offended people of old, so that more than
twice as many of the book were sold when they changed the name to "A Sure
Guide to Heaven." The good old gentleman whom I have mentioned before has
come to the time of life when many old men cry easily, and forget their
tears as children do.--He was a worthy gentleman,--he said,--a very
worthy gentleman, but unfortunate,--very unfortunate.  Sadly deformed
about the spine and the feet.  Had an impression that the late Lord Byron
had some malformation of this kind.  Had heerd there was something the
matter with the ankle-j'ints of that nobleman, but he was a man of
talents.  This gentleman seemed to be a man of talents.  Could not always
agree with his statements,--thought he was a little over-partial to this
city, and had some free opinions; but was sorry to lose him,--and
if--there was anything--he--could--.  In the midst of these kind
expressions, the gentleman with the diamond, the Koh-i-noor, as we called
him, asked, in a very unpleasant sort of way, how the old boy was likely
to cut up,--meaning what money our friend was going to leave behind.

The young fellow John spoke up, to the effect that this was a diabolish
snobby question, when a man was dying and not dead.--To this the
Koh-i-noor replied, by asking if the other meant to insult him.  Whereto
the young man John rejoined that he had no particul'r intentions one way
or t'other.-The Kohi-noor then suggested the young man's stepping out
into the yard, that he, the speaker, might "slap his chops."--Let 'em
alone, said young Maryland,--it 'll soon be over, and they won't hurt
each other much.--So they went out.

The Koh-i-noor entertained the very common idea, that, when one quarrels
with another, the simple thing to do is to knock the man down, and there
is the end of it.  Now those who have watched such encounters are aware
of two things: first, that it is not so easy to knock a man down as it is
to talk about it; secondly, that, if you do happen to knock a man down,
there is a very good chance that he will be angry, and get up and give
you a thrashing.

So the Koh-i-noor thought he would begin, as soon as they got into the
yard, by knocking his man down, and with this intention swung his arm
round after the fashion of rustics and those unskilled in the noble art,
expecting the young fellow John to drop when his fist, having completed a
quarter of a circle, should come in contact with the side of that young
man's head.  Unfortunately for this theory, it happens that a blow struck
out straight is as much shorter, and therefore as much quicker than the
rustic's swinging blow, as the radius is shorter than the quarter of a
circle.  The mathematical and mechanical corollary was, that the
Koh-i-noor felt something hard bring up suddenly against his right eye,
which something he could have sworn was a paving-stone, judging by his
sensations; and as this threw his person somewhat backwards, and the
young man John jerked his own head back a little, the swinging blow had
nothing to stop it; and as the Jewel staggered between the hit he got and
the blow he missed, he tripped and "went to grass," so far as the
back-yard of our boardinghouse was provided with that vegetable.  It was
a signal illustration of that fatal mistake, so frequent in young and
ardent natures with inconspicuous calves and negative pectorals, that
they can settle most little quarrels on the spot by "knocking the man
down."

We are in the habit of handling our faces so carefully, that a heavy
blow, taking effect on that portion of the surface, produces a most
unpleasant surprise, which is accompanied with odd sensations, as of
seeing sparks, and a kind of electrical or ozone-like odor,
half-sulphurous in character, and which has given rise to a very vulgar
and profane threat sometimes heard from the lips of bullies.  A person
not used to pugilistic gestures does not instantly recover from this
surprise.  The Koh-i-noor exasperated by his failure, and still a little
confused by the smart hit he had received, but furious, and confident of
victory over a young fellow a good deal lighter than himself, made a
desperate rush to bear down all before him and finish the contest at
once.  That is the way all angry greenhorns and incompetent persons
attempt to settle matters.  It does n't do, if the other fellow is only
cool, moderately quick, and has a very little science.  It didn't do this
time; for, as the assailant rushed in with his arms flying everywhere,
like the vans of a windmill, he ran a prominent feature of his face
against a fist which was travelling in the other direction, and
immediately after struck the knuckles of the young man's other fist a
severe blow with the part of his person known as the epigastrium to one
branch of science and the bread-basket to another.  This second round
closed the battle.  The Koh-i-noor had got enough, which in such cases is
more than as good as a feast.  The young fellow asked him if he was
satisfied, and held out his hand.  But the other sulked, and muttered
something about revenge.--Jest as ye like,--said the young man
John.--Clap a slice o' raw beefsteak on to that mouse o' yours 'n' 't'll
take down the swellin'.  (Mouse is a technical term for a bluish, oblong,
rounded elevation occasioned by running one's forehead or eyebrow against
another's knuckles.) The young fellow was particularly pleased that he
had had an opportunity of trying his proficiency in the art of
self-defence without the gloves.  The Koh-i-noor did not favor us with
his company for a day or two, being confined to his chamber, it was said,
by a slight feverish, attack. He was chop-fallen always after this, and
got negligent in his person.  The impression must have been a deep one;
for it was observed, that, when he came down again, his moustache and
whiskers had turned visibly white about the roots.  In short, it
disgraced him, and rendered still more conspicuous a tendency to
drinking, of which he had been for some time suspected.  This, and the
disgust which a young lady naturally feels at hearing that her lover has
been "licked by a fellah not half his size," induced the landlady's
daughter to take that decided step which produced a change in the
programme of her career I may hereafter allude to.

I never thought he would come to good, when I heard him attempting to
sneer at an unoffending city so respectable as Boston.  After a man
begins to attack the State-House, when he gets bitter about the
Frog-Pond, you may be sure there is not much left of him.  Poor Edgar Poe
died in the hospital soon after he got into this way of talking; and so
sure as you find an unfortunate fellow reduced to this pass, you had
better begin praying for him, and stop lending him money, for he is on
his last legs.  Remember poor Edgar!  He is dead and gone; but the
State-House has its cupola fresh-gilded, and the Frog-Pond has got a
fountain that squirts up a hundred feet into the air and glorifies that
humble sheet with a fine display of provincial rainbows.

--I cannot fulfil my promise in this number.  I expected to gratify your
curiosity, if you have become at all interested in these puzzles, doubts,
fancies, whims, or whatever you choose to call them, of mine.  Next month
you shall hear all about it.

--It was evening, and I was going to the sick-chamber.  As I paused
at the door before entering, I heard a sweet voice singing.  It was
not the wild melody I had sometimes heard at midnight:--no, this was
the voice of Iris, and I could distinguish every word.  I had seen
the verses in her book; the melody was new to me.  Let me finish my
page with them.


               HYMN OF TRUST.

     O Love Divine, that stooped to share
     Our sharpest pang, our bitterest tear,
     On Thee we cast each earthborn care,
     We smile at pain while Thou art near!

     Though long the weary way we tread,
     And sorrow crown each lingering year,
     No path we shun, no darkness dread,
     Our hearts still whispering, Thou art near!

     When drooping pleasure turns to grief,
     And trembling faith is changed to fear,
     The murmuring wind, the quivering leaf
     Shall softly tell us, Thou art near!

     On Thee we fling our burdening woe,
     O Love Divine, forever dear,
     Content to suffer, while we know,
     Living and dying, Thou art near!




XII

A young fellow, born of good stock, in one of the more thoroughly
civilized portions of these United States of America, bred in good
principles, inheriting a social position which makes him at his ease
everywhere, means sufficient to educate him thoroughly without taking
away the stimulus to vigorous exertion, and with a good opening in some
honorable path of labor, is the finest sight our private satellite has
had the opportunity of inspecting on the planet to which she belongs.  In
some respects it was better to be a young Greek.  If we may trust the old
marbles, my friend with his arm stretched over my head, above there, (in
plaster of Paris,) or the discobolus, whom one may see at the principal
sculpture gallery of this metropolis,--those Greek young men were of
supreme beauty. Their close curls, their elegantly set heads, column-like
necks, straight noses, short, curled lips, firm chins, deep chests, light
flanks, large muscles, small joints, were finer than anything we ever
see.  It may well be questioned whether the human shape will ever present
itself again in a race of such perfect symmetry.  But the life of the
youthful Greek was local, not planetary, like that of the young American.
He had a string of legends, in place of our Gospels.  He had no printed
books, no newspaper, no steam caravans, no forks, no soap, none of the
thousand cheap conveniences which have become matters of necessity to our
modern civilization.  Above all things, if he aspired to know as well as
to enjoy, he found knowledge not diffused everywhere about him, so that a
day's labor would buy him more wisdom than a year could master, but held
in private hands, hoarded in precious manuscripts, to be sought for only
as gold is sought in narrow fissures, and in the beds of brawling
streams.  Never, since man came into this atmosphere of oxygen and azote,
was there anything like the condition of the young American of the
nineteenth century.  Having in possession or in prospect the best part of
half a world, with all its climates and soils to choose from; equipped
with wings of fire and smoke than fly with him day and night, so that he
counts his journey not in miles, but in degrees, and sees the seasons
change as the wild fowl sees them in his annual flights; with huge
leviathans always ready to take him on their broad backs and push behind
them with their pectoral or caudal fins the waters that seam the
continent or separate the hemispheres; heir of all old civilizations,
founder of that new one which, if all the prophecies of the human heart
are not lies, is to be the noblest, as it is the last; isolated in space
from the races that are governed by dynasties whose divine right grows
out of human wrong, yet knit into the most absolute solidarity with
mankind of all times and places by the one great thought he inherits as
his national birthright; free to form and express his opinions on almost
every subject, and assured that he will soon acquire the last franchise
which men withhold from man,--that of stating the laws of his spiritual
being and the beliefs he accepts without hindrance except from clearer
views of truth,--he seems to want nothing for a large, wholesome, noble,
beneficent life.  In fact, the chief danger is that he will think the
whole planet is made for him, and forget that there are some
possibilities left in the debris of the old-world civilization which
deserve a certain respectful consideration at his hands.

The combing and clipping of this shaggy wild continent are in some
measure done for him by those who have gone before.  Society has
subdivided itself enough to have a place for every form of talent. Thus,
if a man show the least sign of ability as a sculptor or a painter, for
instance, he finds the means of education and a demand for his services.
Even a man who knows nothing but science will be provided for, if he does
not think it necessary to hang about his birthplace all his days,--which
is a most unAmerican weakness.  The apron-strings of an American mother
are made of India-rubber.  Her boy belongs where he is wanted; and that
young Marylander of ours spoke for all our young men, when he said that
his home was wherever the stars and stripes blew over his head.

And that leads me to say a few words of this young gentleman, who made
that audacious movement lately which I chronicled in my last
record,--jumping over the seats of I don't know how many boarders to put
himself in the place which the Little Gentleman's absence had left vacant
at the side of Iris.  When a young man is found habitually at the side of
any one given young lady,--when he lingers where she stays, and hastens
when she leaves,--when his eyes follow her as she moves and rest upon her
when she is still,--when he begins to grow a little timid, he who was so
bold, and a little pensive, he who was so gay, whenever accident finds
them alone,--when he thinks very often of the given young lady, and
names her very seldom,--

What do you say about it, my charming young expert in that sweet science
in which, perhaps, a long experience is not the first of qualifications?

--But we don't know anything about this young man, except that he is
good-looking, and somewhat high-spirited, and strong-limbed, and has a
generous style of nature,--all very promising, but by no means proving
that he is a proper lover for Iris, whose heart we turned inside out when
we opened that sealed book of hers.

Ah, my dear young friend!  When your mamma then, if you will believe it,
a very slight young lady, with very pretty hair and figure--came and told
her mamma that your papa had--had--asked No, no, no! she could n't say
it; but her mother--oh the depth of maternal sagacity!--guessed it all
without another word!--When your mother, I say, came and told her mother
she was engaged, and your grandmother told your grandfather, how much did
they know of the intimate nature of the young gentleman to whom she had
pledged her existence?  I will not be so hard as to ask how much your
respected mamma knew at that time of the intimate nature of your
respected papa, though, if we should compare a young girl's
man-as-she-thinks-him with a forty-summered matron's man-as-she-finds-him,
I have my doubts as to whether the second would be a facsimile of the
first in most cases.

The idea that in this world each young person is to wait until he or she
finds that precise counterpart who alone of all creation was meant for
him or her, and then fall instantly in love with it, is pretty enough,
only it is not Nature's way.  It is not at all essential that all pairs
of human beings should be, as we sometimes say of particular couples,
"born for each other."  Sometimes a man or a woman is made a great deal
better and happier in the end for having had to conquer the faults of the
one beloved, and make the fitness not found at first, by gradual
assimilation.  There is a class of good women who have no right to marry
perfectly good men, because they have the power of saving those who would
go to ruin but for the guiding providence of a good wife.  I have known
many such cases.  It is the most momentous question a woman is ever
called upon to decide, whether the faults of the man she loves are beyond
remedy and will drag her down, or whether she is competent to be his
earthly redeemer and lift him to her own level.

A person of genius should marry a person of character.  Genius does not
herd with genius.  The musk-deer and the civet-cat are never found in
company.  They don't care for strange scents,--they like plain animals
better than perfumed ones.  Nay, if you will have the kindness to notice,
Nature has not gifted my lady musk-deer with the personal peculiarity by
which her lord is so widely known.

Now when genius allies itself with character, the world is very apt to
think character has the best of the bargain.  A brilliant woman marries a
plain, manly fellow, with a simple intellectual mechanism;--we have all
seen such cases.  The world often stares a good deal and wonders.  She
should have taken that other, with a far more complex mental machinery.
She might have had a watch with the philosophical compensation-balance,
with the metaphysical index which can split a second into tenths, with
the musical chime which can turn every quarter of an hour into melody.
She has chosen a plain one, that keeps good time, and that is all.

Let her alone!  She knows what she is about.  Genius has an infinitely
deeper reverence for character than character can have for genius.  To be
sure, genius gets the world's praise, because its work is a tangible
product, to be bought, or had for nothing.  It bribes the common voice to
praise it by presents of speeches, poems, statues, pictures, or whatever
it can please with.  Character evolves its best products for home
consumption; but, mind you, it takes a deal more to feed a family for
thirty years than to make a holiday feast for our neighbors once or twice
in our lives.  You talk of the fire of genius.  Many a blessed woman, who
dies unsung and unremembered, has given out more of the real vital heat
that keeps the life in human souls, without a spark flitting through her
humble chimney to tell the world about it, than would set a dozen
theories smoking, or a hundred odes simmering, in the brains of so many
men of genius.  It is in latent caloric, if I may borrow a philosophical
expression, that many of the noblest hearts give out the life that warms
them.  Cornelia's lips grow white, and her pulse hardly warms her thin
fingers,--but she has melted all the ice out of the hearts of those young
Gracchi, and her lost heat is in the blood of her youthful heroes.  We
are always valuing the soul's temperature by the thermometer of public
deed or word.  Yet the great sun himself, when he pours his noonday beams
upon some vast hyaline boulder, rent from the eternal ice-quarries, and
floating toward the tropics, never warms it a fraction above the
thirty-two degrees of Fahrenheit that marked the moment when the first
drop trickled down its side.

How we all like the spirting up of a fountain, seemingly against the law
that makes water everywhere slide, roll, leap, tumble headlong, to get as
low as the earth will let it!  That is genius.  But what is this
transient upward movement, which gives us the glitter and the rainbow, to
that unsleeping, all-present force of gravity, the same yesterday,
to-day, and forever, (if the universe be eternal,)--the great outspread
hand of God himself, forcing all things down into their places, and
keeping them there?  Such, in smaller proportion, is the force of
character to the fitful movements of genius, as they are or have been
linked to each other in many a household, where one name was historic,
and the other, let me say the nobler, unknown, save by some faint
reflected ray, borrowed from its lustrous companion.

Oftentimes, as I have lain swinging on the water, in the swell of the
Chelsea ferry-boats, in that long, sharp-pointed, black cradle in which I
love to let the great mother rock me, I have seen a tall ship glide by
against the tide, as if drawn by some invisible towline, with a hundred
strong arms pulling it.  Her sails hung unfilled, her streamers were
drooping, she had neither side-wheel nor stern-wheel; still she moved on,
stately, in serene triumph, as if with her own life.  But I knew that on
the other side of the ship, hidden beneath the great hulk that swam so
majestically, there was a little toiling steam-tug, with heart of fire
and arms of iron, that was hugging it close and dragging it bravely on;
and I knew, that, if the little steam-tug untwined her arms and left the
tall ship, it would wallow and roll about, and drift hither and thither,
and go off with the refluent tide, no man knows whither.  And so I have
known more than one genius, high-decked, full-freighted, wide-sailed,
gay-pennoned, that, but for the bare toiling arms, and brave, warm,
beating heart of the faithful little wife, that nestled close in his
shadow, and clung to him, so that no wind or wave could part them, and
dragged him on against all the tide of circumstance, would soon have gone
down the stream and been heard of no more.--No, I am too much a lover of
genius, I sometimes think, and too often get impatient with dull people,
so that, in their weak talk, where nothing is taken for granted, I look
forward to some future possible state of development, when a gesture
passing between a beatified human soul and an archangel shall signify as
much as the complete history of a planet, from the time when it curdled
to the time when its sun was burned out.  And yet, when a strong brain is
weighed with a true heart, it seems to me like balancing a bubble against
a wedge of gold.

--It takes a very true man to be a fitting companion for a woman of
genius, but not a very great one.  I am not sure that she will not
embroider her ideal better on a plain ground than on one with a brilliant
pattern already worked in its texture.  But as the very essence of genius
is truthfulness, contact with realities, (which are always ideas behind
shows of form or language,) nothing is so contemptible as falsehood and
pretence in its eyes.  Now it is not easy to find a perfectly true woman,
and it is very hard to find a perfectly true man.  And a woman of genius,
who has the sagacity to choose such a one as her companion, shows more of
the divine gift in so doing than in her finest talk or her most brilliant
work of letters or of art.

I have been a good while coming at a secret, for which I wished to
prepare you before telling it.  I think there is a kindly feeling growing
up between Iris and our young Marylander.  Not that I suppose there is
any distinct understanding between them, but that the affinity which has
drawn him from the remote corner where he sat to the side of the young
girl is quietly bringing their two natures together.  Just now she is all
given up to another; but when he no longer calls upon her daily thoughts
and cares, I warn you not to be surprised, if this bud of friendship open
like the evening primrose, with a sound as of a sudden stolen kiss, and
lo! the flower of full-blown love lies unfolded before you.

And now the days had come for our little friend, whose whims and
weaknesses had interested us, perhaps, as much as his better traits, to
make ready for that long journey which is easier to the cripple than to
the strong man, and on which none enters so willingly as he who has borne
the life-long load of infirmity during his earthly pilgrimage.  At this
point, under most circumstances, I would close the doors and draw the
veil of privacy before the chamber where the birth which we call death,
out of life into the unknown world, is working its mystery.  But this
friend of ours stood alone in the world, and, as the last act of his life
was mainly in harmony with the rest of its drama, I do not here feel the
force of the objection commonly lying against that death-bed literature
which forms the staple of a certain portion of the press.  Let me explain
what I mean, so that my readers may think for themselves a little, before
they accuse me of hasty expressions.

The Roman Catholic Church has certain formulas for its dying children, to
which almost all of them attach the greatest importance.  There is hardly
a criminal so abandoned that he is not anxious to receive the
"consolations of religion" in his last hours. Even if he be senseless,
but still living, I think that the form is gone through with, just as
baptism is administered to the unconscious new-born child.  Now we do not
quarrel with these forms. We look with reverence and affection upon all
symbols which give peace and comfort to our fellow-creatures.  But the
value of the new-born child's passive consent to the ceremony is null, as
testimony to the truth of a doctrine.  The automatic closing of a dying
man's lips on the consecrated wafer proves nothing in favor of the Real
Presence, or any other dogma.  And, speaking generally, the evidence of
dying men in favor of any belief is to be received with great caution.

They commonly tell the truth about their present feelings, no doubt. A
dying man's deposition about anything he knows is good evidence. But it
is of much less consequence what a man thinks and says when he is changed
by pain, weakness, apprehension, than what he thinks when he is truly and
wholly himself.  Most murderers die in a very pious frame of mind,
expecting to go to glory at once; yet no man believes he shall meet a
larger average of pirates and cut-throats in the streets of the New
Jerusalem than of honest folks that died in their beds.

Unfortunately, there has been a very great tendency to make capital of
various kinds out of dying men's speeches.  The lies that have been put
into their mouths for this purpose are endless.  The prime minister,
whose last breath was spent in scolding his nurse, dies with a
magnificent apothegm on his lips, manufactured by a reporter. Addison
gets up a tableau and utters an admirable sentiment,--or somebody makes
the posthumous dying epigram for him.  The incoherent babble of green
fields is translated into the language of stately sentiment.  One would
think, all that dying men had to do was to say the prettiest thing they
could,--to make their rhetorical point,--and then bow themselves
politely out of the world.

Worse than this is the torturing of dying people to get their evidence in
favor of this or that favorite belief.  The camp-followers of proselyting
sects have come in at the close of every life where they could get in, to
strip the languishing soul of its thoughts, and carry them off as spoils.
The Roman Catholic or other priest who insists on the reception of his
formula means kindly, we trust, and very commonly succeeds in getting the
acquiescence of the subject of his spiritual surgery, but do not let us
take the testimony of people who are in the worst condition to form
opinions as evidence of the truth or falsehood of that which they accept.
A lame man's opinion of dancing is not good for much.  A poor fellow who
can neither eat nor drink, who is sleepless and full of pains, whose
flesh has wasted from him, whose blood is like water, who is gasping for
breath, is not in a condition to judge fairly of human life, which in all
its main adjustments is intended for men in a normal, healthy condition.
It is a remark I have heard from the wise Patriarch of the Medical
Profession among us, that the moral condition of patients with disease
above the great breathing-muscle, the diaphragm, is much more hopeful
than that of patients with disease below it, in the digestive organs.
Many an honest ignorant man has given us pathology when he thought he was
giving us psychology.  With this preliminary caution I shall proceed to
the story of the Little Gentleman's leaving us.

When the divinity-student found that our fellow-boarder was not likely to
remain long with us, he, being a young man of tender conscience and
kindly nature, was not a little exercised on his behalf.  It was
undeniable that on several occasions the Little Gentleman had expressed
himself with a good deal of freedom on a class of subjects which,
according to the divinity-student, he had no right to form an opinion
upon.  He therefore considered his future welfare in jeopardy.

The Muggletonian sect have a very odd way of dealing with people. If I,
the Professor, will only give in to the Muggletonian doctrine, there
shall be no question through all that persuasion that I am competent to
judge of that doctrine; nay, I shall be quoted as evidence of its truth,
while I live, and cited, after I am dead, as testimony in its behalf.
But if I utter any ever so slight Anti-Muggletonian sentiment, then I
become incompetent to form any opinion on the matter.  This, you cannot
fail to observe, is exactly the way the pseudo-sciences go to work, as
explained in my Lecture on Phrenology.  Now I hold that he whose
testimony would be accepted in behalf of the Muggletonian doctrine has a
right to be heard against it.  Whoso offers me any article of belief for
my signature implies that I am competent to form an opinion upon it; and
if my positive testimony in its favor is of any value, then my negative
testimony against it is also of value.

I thought my young friend's attitude was a little too much like that of
the Muggletonians.  I also remarked a singular timidity on his part lest
somebody should "unsettle" somebody's faith,--as if faith did not require
exercise as much as any other living thing, and were not all the better
for a shaking up now and then.  I don't mean that it would be fair to
bother Bridget, the wild Irish girl, or Joice Heth, the centenarian, or
any other intellectual non-combatant; but all persons who proclaim a
belief which passes judgment on their neighbors must be ready to have it
"unsettled," that is, questioned, at all times and by anybody,--just as
those who set up bars across a thoroughfare must expect to have them
taken down by every one who wants to pass, if he is strong enough.

Besides, to think of trying to water-proof the American mind against the
questions that Heaven rains down upon it shows a misapprehension of our
new conditions.  If to question everything be unlawful and dangerous, we
had better undeclare our independence at once; for what the Declaration
means is the right to question everything, even the truth of its own
fundamental proposition.

The old-world order of things is an arrangement of locks and canals,
where everything depends on keeping the gates shut, and so holding the
upper waters at their level; but the system under which the young
republican American is born trusts the whole unimpeded tide of life to
the great elemental influences, as the vast rivers of the continent
settle their own level in obedience to the laws that govern the planet
and the spheres that surround it.

The divinity-student was not quite up to the idea of the commonwealth, as
our young friend the Marylander, for instance, understood it.  He could
not get rid of that notion of private property in truth, with the right
to fence it in, and put up a sign-board, thus:

               ALL TRESPASSERS ARE WARNED OFF THESE
                              GROUNDS!

He took the young Marylander to task for going to the Church of the
Galileans, where he had several times accompanied Iris of late.

I am a Churchman,--the young man said,--by education and habit.  I love
my old Church for many reasons, but most of all because I think it has
educated me out of its own forms into the spirit of its highest
teachings.  I think I belong to the "Broad Church," if any of you can
tell what that means.

I had the rashness to attempt to answer the question myself.--Some say
the Broad Church means the collective mass of good people of all
denominations.  Others say that such a definition is nonsense; that a
church is an organization, and the scattered good folks are no
organization at all.  They think that men will eventually come together
on the basis of one or two or more common articles of belief, and form a
great unity.  Do they see what this amounts to? It means an equal
division of intellect!  It is mental agrarianism! a thing that never was
and never will be until national and individual idiosyncrasies have
ceased to exist.  The man of thirty-nine beliefs holds the man of one
belief a pauper; he is not going to give up thirty-eight of them for the
sake of fraternizing with the other in the temple which bears on its
front, "Deo erexit Voltaire."  A church is a garden, I have heard it
said, and the illustration was neatly handled.  Yes, and there is no such
thing as a broad garden.  It must be fenced in, and whatever is fenced in
is narrow.  You cannot have arctic and tropical plants growing together
in it, except by the forcing system, which is a mighty narrow piece of
business.  You can't make a village or a parish or a family think alike,
yet you suppose that you can make a world pinch its beliefs or pad them
to a single pattern!  Why, the very life of an ecclesiastical
organization is a life of induction, a state of perpetually disturbed
equilibrium kept up by another charged body in the neighborhood.  If the
two bodies touch and share their respective charges, down goes the index
of the electrometer!

Do you know that every man has a religious belief peculiar to himself?
Smith is always a Smithite.  He takes in exactly Smith's-worth of
knowledge, Smith's-worth of truth, of beauty, of divinity. And Brown has
from time immemorial been trying to burn him, to excommunicate him, to
anonymous-article him, because he did not take in Brown's-worth of
knowledge, truth, beauty, divinity.  He cannot do it, any more than a
pint-pot can hold a quart, or a quart-pot be filled by a pint.  Iron is
essentially the same everywhere and always; but the sulphate of iron is
never the same as the carbonate of iron.  Truth is invariable; but the
Smithate of truth must always differ from the Brownate of truth.

The wider the intellect, the larger and simpler the expressions in which
its knowledge is embodied.  The inferior race, the degraded and enslaved
people, the small-minded individual, live in the details which to larger
minds and more advanced tribes of men reduce themselves to axioms and
laws.  As races and individual minds must always differ just as sulphates
and carbonates do, I cannot see ground for expecting the Broad Church to
be founded on any fusion of intellectual beliefs, which of course implies
that those who hold the larger number of doctrines as essential shall
come down to those who hold the smaller number.  These doctrines are to
the negative aristocracy what the quarterings of their coats are to the
positive orders of nobility.

The Broad Church, I think, will never be based on anything that requires
the use of language. Freemasonry gives an idea of such a church, and a
brother is known and cared for in a strange land where no word of his can
be understood.  The apostle of this church may be a deaf mute carrying a
cup of cold water to a thirsting fellow-creature.  The cup of cold water
does not require to be translated for a foreigner to understand it.  I am
afraid the only Broad Church possible is one that has its creed in the
heart, and not in the head,--that we shall know its members by their
fruits, and not by their words.  If you say this communion of well-doers
is no church, I can only answer, that all organized bodies have their
limits of size, and that when we find a man a hundred feet high and
thirty feet broad across the shoulders, we will look out for an
organization that shall include all Christendom.

Some of us do practically recognize a Broad Church and a Narrow Church,
however.  The Narrow Church may be seen in the ship's boats of humanity,
in the long boat, in the jolly boat, in the captain's gig, lying off the
poor old vessel, thanking God that they are safe, and reckoning how soon
the hulk containing the mass of their fellow-creatures will go down.  The
Broad Church is on board, working hard at the pumps, and very slow to
believe that the ship will be swallowed up with so many poor people in
it, fastened down under the hatches ever since it floated.

--All this, of course, was nothing but my poor notion about these
matters. I am simply an "outsider," you know; only it doesn't do very
well for a nest of Hingham boxes to talk too much about outsiders and
insiders!

After this talk of ours, I think these two young people went pretty
regularly to the Church of the Galileans.  Still they could not keep away
from the sweet harmonies and rhythmic litanies of Saint Polycarp on the
great Church festival-days; so that, between the two, they were so much
together, that the boarders began to make remarks, and our landlady said
to me, one day, that, though it was noon of her business, them that had
eyes couldn't help seein' that there was somethin' goin', on between them
two young people; she thought the young man was a very likely young man,
though jest what his prospecs was was unbeknown to her; but she thought
he must be doing well, and rather guessed he would be able to take care
of a femily, if he didn't go to takin' a house; for a gentleman and his
wife could board a great deal cheaper than they could keep house;--but
then that girl was nothin' but a child, and wouldn't think of bein'
married this five year.  They was good boarders, both of 'em, paid
regular, and was as pooty a couple as she ever laid eyes on.

--To come back to what I began to speak of before,--the divinity-student
was exercised in his mind about the Little Gentleman, and, in the
kindness of his heart,--for he was a good young man,--and in the strength
of his convictions,--for he took it for granted that he and his crowd
were right, and other folks and their crowd were wrong,--he determined to
bring the Little Gentleman round to his faith before he died, if he
could.  So he sent word to the sick man, that he should be pleased to
visit him and have some conversation with him; and received for answer
that he would be welcome.

The divinity-student made him a visit, therefore and had a somewhat
remarkable interview with him, which I shall briefly relate, without
attempting to justify the positions taken by the Little Gentleman. He
found him weak, but calm.  Iris sat silent by his pillow.

After the usual preliminaries, the divinity-student said; in a kind way,
that he was sorry to find him in failing health, that he felt concerned
for his soul, and was anxious to assist him in making preparations for
the great change awaiting him.

I thank you, Sir,--said the Little Gentleman, permit me to ask you, what
makes you think I am not ready for it, Sir, and that you can do anything
to help me, Sir?

I address you only as a fellow-man,--said the divinity-student,--and
therefore a fellow-sinner.

I am not a man, Sir!--said the Little Gentleman.--I was born into this
world the wreck of a man, and I shall not be judged with a race to which
I do not belong.  Look at this!--he said, and held up his withered
arm.--See there!--and he pointed to his misshapen extremities.--Lay your
hand here!--and he laid his own on the region of his misplaced heart.--I
have known nothing of the life of your race.  When I first came to my
consciousness, I found myself an object of pity, or a sight to show.  The
first strange child I ever remember hid its face and would not come near
me.  I was a broken-hearted as well as broken-bodied boy.  I grew into
the emotions of ripening youth, and all that I could have loved shrank
from my presence.  I became a man in years, and had nothing in common
with manhood but its longings.  My life is the dying pang of a worn-out
race, and I shall go down alone into the dust, out of this world of men
and women, without ever knowing the fellowship of the one or the love of
the other.  I will not die with a lie rattling in my throat. If another
state of being has anything worse in store for me, I have had a long
apprenticeship to give me strength that I may bear it.  I don't believe
it, Sir!  I have too much faith for that.  God has not left me wholly
without comfort, even here.  I love this old place where I was born;--the
heart of the world beats under the three hills of Boston, Sir!  I love
this great land, with so many tall men in it, and so many good, noble
women.--His eyes turned to the silent figure by his pillow.--I have
learned to accept meekly what has been allotted to me, but I cannot
honestly say that I think my sin has been greater than my suffering.  I
bear the ignorance and the evil-doing of whole generations in my single
person.  I never drew a breath of air nor took a step that was not a
punishment for another's fault.  I may have had many wrong thoughts, but
I cannot have done many wrong deeds,--for my cage has been a narrow one,
and I have paced it alone.  I have looked through the bars and seen the
great world of men busy and happy, but I had no part in their doings.  I
have known what it was to dream of the great passions; but since my
mother kissed me before she died, no woman's lips have pressed my
cheek,--nor ever will.

--The young girl's eyes glittered with a sudden film, and almost without
a thought, but with a warm human instinct that rushed up into her face
with her heart's blood, she bent over and kissed him. It was the
sacrament that washed out the memory of long years of bitterness, and I
should hold it an unworthy thought to defend her. The Little Gentleman
repaid her with the only tear any of us ever saw him shed.

The divinity-student rose from his place, and, turning away from the sick
man, walked to the other side of the room, where he bowed his head and
was still.  All the questions he had meant to ask had faded from his
memory.  The tests he had prepared by which to judge of his
fellow-creature's fitness for heaven seemed to have lost their virtue.
He could trust the crippled child of sorrow to the Infinite Parent.  The
kiss of the fair-haired girl had been like a sign from heaven, that
angels watched over him whom he was presuming but a moment before to
summon before the tribunal of his private judgment. Shall I pray with
you?--he said, after a pause.  A little before he would have said, Shall
I pray for you?--The Christian religion, as taught by its Founder, is
full of sentiment.  So we must not blame the divinity-student, if he was
overcome by those yearnings of human sympathy which predominate so much
more in the sermons of the Master than in the writings of his successors,
and which have made the parable of the Prodigal Son the consolation of
mankind, as it has been the stumbling-block of all exclusive doctrines.

Pray!--said the Little Gentleman.

The divinity-student prayed, in low, tender tones,

Iris and the Little Gentleman that God would look on his servant lying
helpless at the feet of his mercy; that He would remember his long years
of bondage in the flesh; that He would deal gently with the bruised reed.
Thou hast visited the sins of the fathers upon this their child.  Oh,
turn away from him the penalties of his own transgressions!  Thou hast
laid upon him, from infancy, the cross which thy stronger children are
called upon to take up; and now that he is fainting under it, be Thou his
stay, and do Thou succor him that is tempted!  Let his manifold
infirmities come between him and Thy judgment; in wrath remember mercy!
If his eyes are not opened to all Thy truth, let Thy compassion lighten
the darkness that rests upon him, even as it came through the word of thy
Son to blind Bartimeus, who sat by the wayside, begging!

Many more petitions he uttered, but all in the same subdued tone of
tenderness.  In the presence of helpless suffering, and in the
fast-darkening shadow of the Destroyer, he forgot all but his Christian
humanity, and cared more about consoling his fellow-man than making a
proselyte of him.

This was the last prayer to which the Little Gentleman ever listened.
Some change was rapidly coming over him during this last hour of which I
have been speaking.  The excitement of pleading his cause before his
self-elected spiritual adviser,--the emotion which overcame him, when the
young girl obeyed the sudden impulse of her feelings and pressed her lips
to his cheek,--the thoughts that mastered him while the divinity-student
poured out his soul for him in prayer, might well hurry on the inevitable
moment.  When the divinity-student had uttered his last petition,
commending him to the Father through his Son's intercession, he turned to
look upon him before leaving his chamber.  His face was changed.--There
is a language of the human countenance which we all understand without an
interpreter, though the lineaments belong to the rudest savage that ever
stammered in an unknown barbaric dialect.  By the stillness of the
sharpened features, by the blankness of the tearless eyes, by the
fixedness of the smileless mouth, by the deadening tints, by the
contracted brow, by the dilating nostril, we know that the soul is soon
to leave its mortal tenement, and is already closing up its windows and
putting out its fires.--Such was the aspect of the face upon which the
divinity-student looked, after the brief silence which followed his
prayer.  The change had been rapid, though not that abrupt one which is
liable to happen at any moment in these cases.--The sick man looked
towards him.--Farewell,--he said,--I thank you.  Leave me alone with her.

When the divinity-student had gone, and the Little Gentleman found
himself alone with Iris, he lifted his hand to his neck, and took from
it, suspended by a slender chain, a quaint, antique-looking key,--the
same key I had once seen him holding.  He gave this to her, and pointed
to a carved cabinet opposite his bed, one of those that had so attracted
my curious eyes and set me wondering as to what it might contain.

Open it,--he said,--and light the lamp.--The young girl walked to the
cabinet and unlocked the door.  A deep recess appeared, lined with black
velvet, against which stood in white relief an ivory crucifix.  A silver
lamp hung over it.  She lighted the lamp and came back to the bedside.
The dying man fixed his eyes upon the figure of the dying Saviour.--Give
me your hand, he said; and Iris placed her right hand in his left.  So
they remained, until presently his eyes lost their meaning, though they
still remained vacantly fixed upon the white image.  Yet he held the
young girl's hand firmly, as if it were leading him through some
deep-shadowed valley and it was all he could cling to.  But presently an
involuntary muscular contraction stole over him, and his terrible dying
grasp held the poor girl as if she were wedged in an engine of torture.
She pressed her lips together and sat still.  The inexorable hand held
her tighter and tighter, until she felt as if her own slender fingers
would be crushed in its gripe.  It was one of the tortures of the
Inquisition she was suffering, and she could not stir from her place.
Then, in her great anguish, she, too, cast her eyes upon that dying
figure, and, looking upon its pierced hands and feet and side and
lacerated forehead, she felt that she also must suffer uncomplaining.  In
the moment of her sharpest pain she did not forget the duties of her
under office, but dried the dying man's moist forehead with her
handkerchief, even while the dews of agony were glistening on her own.
How long this lasted she never could tell.  Time and thirst are two
things you and I talk about; but the victims whom holy men and righteous
judges used to stretch on their engines knew better what they meant than
you or I!--What is that great bucket of water for? said the Marchioness
de Brinvilliers, before she was placed on the rack.--For you to
drink,--said the torturer to the little woman.--She could not think that
it would take such a flood to quench the fire in her and so keep her
alive for her confession.  The torturer knew better than she.

After a time not to be counted in minutes, as the clock measures,
--without any warning,--there came a swift change of his features; his
face turned white, as the waters whiten when a sudden breath passes over
their still surface; the muscles instantly relaxed, and Iris, released at
once from her care for the sufferer and from his unconscious grasp, fell
senseless, with a feeble cry,--the only utterance of her long agony.

Perhaps you sometimes wander in through the iron gates of the Copp's Hill
burial-ground.  You love to stroll round among the graves that crowd each
other in the thickly peopled soil of that breezy summit. You love to lean
on the freestone slab which lies over the bones of the Mathers,--to read
the epitaph of stout William Clark, "Despiser of Sorry Persons and little
Actions,"--to stand by the stone grave of sturdy Daniel Malcolm and look
upon the splintered slab that tells the old rebel's story,--to kneel by
the triple stone that says how the three Worthylakes, father, mother, and
young daughter, died on the same day and lie buried there; a mystery; the
subject of a moving ballad, by the late BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, as may be seen
in his autobiography, which will explain the secret of the triple
gravestone; though the old philosopher has made a mistake, unless the
stone is wrong.

Not very far from that you will find a fair mound, of dimensions fit to
hold a well-grown man.  I will not tell you the inscription upon the
stone which stands at its head; for I do not wish you to be sure of the
resting-place of one who could not bear to think that he should be known
as a cripple among the dead, after being pointed at so long among the
living.  There is one sign, it is true, by which, if you have been a
sagacious reader of these papers, you will at once know it; but I fear
you read carelessly, and must study them more diligently before you will
detect the hint to which I allude.

The Little Gentleman lies where he longed to lie, among the old names and
the old bones of the old Boston people.  At the foot of his resting-place
is the river, alive with the wings and antennae of its colossal
water-insects; over opposite are the great war-ships, and the heavy guns,
which, when they roar, shake the soil in which he lies; and in the
steeple of Christ Church, hard by, are the sweet chimes which are the
Boston boy's Ranz des Vaches, whose echoes follow him all the world over.

                         In Pace!

I, told you a good while ago that the Little Gentleman could not do a
better thing than to leave all his money, whatever it might be, to the
young girl who has since that established such a claim upon him. He did
not, however.  A considerable bequest to one of our public institutions
keeps his name in grateful remembrance.  The telescope through which he
was fond of watching the heavenly bodies, and the movements of which had
been the source of such odd fancies on my part, is now the property of a
Western College.  You smile as you think of my taking it for a fleshless
human figure, when I saw its tube pointing to the sky, and thought it was
an arm, under the white drapery thrown over it for protection.  So do I
smile now; I belong to the numerous class who are prophets after the
fact, and hold my nightmares very cheap by daylight.

I have received many letters of inquiry as to the sound resembling a
woman's voice, which occasioned me so many perplexities.  Some thought
there was no question that he had a second apartment, in which he had
made an asylum for a deranged female relative.  Others were of opinion
that he was, as I once suggested, a "Bluebeard" with patriarchal
tendencies, and I have even been censured for introducing so Oriental an
element into my record of boarding-house experience.

Come in and see me, the Professor, some evening when I have nothing else
to do, and ask me to play you Tartini's Devil's Sonata on that
extraordinary instrument in my possession, well known to amateurs as one
of the masterpieces of Joseph Guarnerius.  The vox humana of the great
Haerlem organ is very lifelike, and the same stop in the organ of the
Cambridge chapel might be mistaken in some of its tones for a human
voice; but I think you never heard anything come so near the cry of a
prima donna as the A string and the E string of this instrument.  A
single fact will illustrate the resemblance.  I was executing some tours
de force upon it one evening, when the policeman of our district rang the
bell sharply, and asked what was the matter in the house.  He had heard a
woman's screams,--he was sure of it.  I had to make the instrument sing
before his eyes before he could be satisfied that he had not heard the
cries of a woman.  The instrument was bequeathed to me by the Little
Gentleman. Whether it had anything to do with the sounds I heard coming
from his chamber, you can form your own opinion;--I have no other
conjecture to offer.  It is not true that a second apartment with a
secret entrance was found; and the story of the veiled lady is the
invention of one of the Reporters.

Bridget, the housemaid, always insisted that he died a Catholic. She had
seen the crucifix, and believed that he prayed on his knees before it.
The last circumstance is very probably true; indeed, there was a spot
worn on the carpet just before this cabinet which might be thus accounted
for.  Why he, whose whole life was a crucifixion, should not love to look
on that divine image of blameless suffering, I cannot see; on the
contrary, it seems to me the most natural thing in the world that he
should.  But there are those who want to make private property of
everything, and can't make up their minds that people who don't think as
they do should claim any interest in that infinite compassion expressed
in the central figure of the Christendom which includes us all.

The divinity-student expressed a hope before the boarders that he should
meet him in heaven.--The question is, whether he'll meet you,--said the
young fellow John, rather smartly.  The divinity-student had n't thought
of that.

However, he is a worthy young man, and I trust I have shown him in a
kindly and respectful light.  He will get a parish by-and-by; and, as he
is about to marry the sister of an old friend,--the Schoolmistress, whom
some of us remember,--and as all sorts of expensive accidents happen to
young married ministers, he will be under bonds to the amount of his
salary, which means starvation, if they are forfeited, to think all his
days as he thought when he was settled,--unless the majority of his
people change with him or in advance of him.  A hard ease, to which
nothing could reconcile a man, except that the faithful discharge of
daily duties in his personal relations with his parishioners will make
him useful enough in his way, though as a thinker he may cease to exist
before he has reached middle age.

--Iris went into mourning for the Little Gentleman.  Although, as I have
said, he left the bulk of his property, by will, to a public institution,
he added a codicil, by which he disposed of various pieces of property as
tokens of kind remembrance.  It was in this way I became the possessor of
the wonderful instrument I have spoken of, which had been purchased for
him out of an Italian convent.  The landlady was comforted with a small
legacy.  The following extract relates to Iris: "in consideration of her
manifold acts of kindness, but only in token of grateful remembrance, and
by no means as a reward for services which cannot be compensated, a
certain messuage, with all the land thereto appertaining, situated in
______ Street, at the North End, so called, of Boston, aforesaid, the
same being the house in which I was born, but now inhabited by several
families, and known as 'The Rookery.'" Iris had also the crucifix, the
portrait, and the red-jewelled ring.  The funeral or death's-head ring
was buried with him.

It was a good while, after the Little Gentleman was gone, before our
boarding-house recovered its wonted cheerfulness.  There was a flavor in
his whims and local prejudices that we liked, even while we smiled at
them.  It was hard to see the tall chair thrust away among useless
lumber, to dismantle his room, to take down the picture of Leah, the
handsome Witch of Essex, to move away the massive shelves that held the
books he loved, to pack up the tube through which he used to study the
silent stars, looking down at him like the eyes of dumb creatures, with a
kind of stupid half-consciousness that did not worry him as did the eyes
of men and women,--and hardest of all to displace that sacred figure to
which his heart had always turned and found refuge, in the feelings it
inspired, from all the perplexities of his busy brain.  It was hard, but
it had to be done.

And by-and-by we grew cheerful again, and the breakfast-table wore
something of its old look.  The Koh-i-noor, as we named the gentleman
with the diamond, left us, however, soon after that "little mill," as the
young fellow John called it, where he came off second best.  His
departure was no doubt hastened by a note from the landlady's daughter,
inclosing a lock of purple hair which she "had valued as a pledge of
affection, ere she knew the hollowness of the vows he had breathed,"
speedily followed by another, inclosing the landlady's bill.  The next
morning he was missing, as were his limited wardrobe and the trunk that
held it.  Three empty bottles of Mrs. Allen's celebrated preparation,
each of them asserting, on its word of honor as a bottle, that its former
contents were "not a dye," were all that was left to us of the
Koh-i-noor.

From this time forward, the landlady's daughter manifested a decided
improvement in her style of carrying herself before the boarders. She
abolished the odious little flat, gummy side-curl.  She left off various
articles of "jewelry."  She began to help her mother in some of her
household duties.  She became a regular attendant on the ministrations of
a very worthy clergyman, having been attracted to his meetin' by
witnessing a marriage ceremony in which he called a man and a woman a
"gentleman" and a "lady,"--a stroke of gentility which quite overcame
her.  She even took a part in what she called a Sabbath school, though it
was held on Sunday, and by no means on Saturday, as the name she intended
to utter implied.  All this, which was very sincere, as I believe, on her
part, and attended with a great improvement in her character, ended in
her bringing home a young man, with straight, sandy hair, brushed so as
to stand up steeply above his forehead, wearing a pair of green
spectacles, and dressed in black broadcloth.  His personal aspect, and a
certain solemnity of countenance, led me to think he must be a clergyman;
and as Master Benjamin Franklin blurted out before several of us
boarders, one day, that "Sis had got a beau," I was pleased at the
prospect of her becoming a minister's wife.  On inquiry, however, I found
that the somewhat solemn look which I had noticed was indeed a
professional one, but not clerical.  He was a young undertaker, who had
just succeeded to a thriving business.  Things, I believe, are going on
well at this time of writing, and I am glad for the landlady's daughter
and her mother.  Sextons and undertakers are the cheerfullest people in
the world at home, as comedians and circus-clowns are the most melancholy
in their domestic circle.

As our old boarding-house is still in existence, I do not feel at liberty
to give too minute a statement of the present condition of each and all
of its inmates.  I am happy to say, however, that they are all alive and
well, up to this time.  That amiable old gentleman who sat opposite to me
is growing older, as old men will, but still smiles benignantly on all
the boarders, and has come to be a kind of father to all of them,--so
that on his birthday there is always something like a family festival.
The Poor Relation, even, has warmed into a filial feeling towards him,
and on his last birthday made him a beautiful present, namely, a very
handsomely bound copy of Blair's celebrated poem, "The Grave."

The young man John is still, as he says, "in fustrate fettle."  I saw him
spar, not long since, at a private exhibition, and do himself great
credit in a set-to with Henry Finnegass, Esq., a professional gentleman
of celebrity.  I am pleased to say that he has been promoted to an upper
clerkship, and, in consequence of his rise in office, has taken an
apartment somewhat lower down than number "forty-'leven," as he
facetiously called his attic.  Whether there is any truth, or not, in the
story of his attachment to, and favorable reception by, the daughter of
the head of an extensive wholesale grocer's establishment, I will not
venture an opinion; I may say, however, that I have met him repeatedly in
company with a very well-nourished and high-colored young lady, who, I
understand, is the daughter of the house in question.

Some of the boarders were of opinion that Iris did not return the
undisguised attentions of the handsome young Marylander.  Instead of
fixing her eyes steadily on him, as she used to look upon the Little
Gentleman, she would turn them away, as if to avoid his own.  They often
went to church together, it is true; but nobody, of course, supposes
there is any relation between religious sympathy and those wretched
"sentimental" movements of the human heart upon which it is commonly
agreed that nothing better is based than society, civilization,
friendship, the relation of husband and wife, and of parent and child,
and which many people must think were singularly overrated by the Teacher
of Nazareth, whose whole life, as I said before, was full of sentiment,
loving this or that young man, pardoning this or that sinner, weeping
over the dead, mourning for the doomed city, blessing, and perhaps
kissing, the little children, so that the Gospels are still cried over
almost as often as the last work of fiction!

But one fine June morning there rumbled up to the door of our
boarding-house a hack containing a lady inside and a trunk on the
outside.  It was our friend the lady-patroness of Miss Iris, the same who
had been called by her admiring pastor "The Model of all the Virtues."
Once a week she had written a letter, in a rather formal hand, but full
of good advice, to her young charge.  And now she had come to carry her
away, thinking that she had learned all she was likely to learn under her
present course of teaching.  The Model, however, was to stay awhile,--a
week, or more,--before they should leave together.

Iris was obedient, as she was bound to be.  She was respectful, grateful,
as a child is with a just, but not tender parent.  Yet something was
wrong.  She had one of her trances, and became statue-like, as before,
only the day after the Model's arrival.  She was wan and silent, tasted
nothing at table, smiled as if by a forced effort, and often looked
vaguely away from those who were looking at her, her eyes just glazed
with the shining moisture of a tear that must not be allowed to gather
and fall.  Was it grief at parting from the place where her strange
friendship had grown up with the Little Gentleman?  Yet she seemed to
have become reconciled to his loss, and rather to have a deep feeling of
gratitude that she had been permitted to care for him in his last weary
days.

The Sunday after the Model's arrival, that lady had an attack of
headache, and was obliged to shut herself up in a darkened room alone.
Our two young friends took the opportunity to go together to the Church
of the Galileans.  They said but little going,--"collecting their
thoughts" for the service, I devoutly hope.  My kind good friend the
pastor preached that day one of his sermons that make us all feel like
brothers and sisters, and his text was that affectionate one from John,
"My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in
deed and in truth."  When Iris and her friend came out of church, they
were both pale, and walked a space without speaking.

At last the young man said,--You and I are not little children, Iris!

She looked in his face an instant, as if startled, for there was
something strange in the tone of his voice.  She smiled faintly, but
spoke never a word.

In deed and in truth, Iris,----

What shall a poor girl say or do, when a strong man falters in his speech
before her, and can do nothing better than hold out his hand to finish
his broken sentence?

The poor girl said nothing, but quietly laid her ungloved hand in
his,--the little soft white hand which had ministered so tenderly and
suffered so patiently.

The blood came back to the young man's cheeks, as he lifted it to his
lips, even as they walked there in the street, touched it gently with
them, and said, "It is mine!"

Iris did not contradict him.

The seasons pass by so rapidly, that I am startled to think how much has
happened since these events I was describing.  Those two young people
would insist on having their own way about their own affairs,
notwithstanding the good lady, so justly called the Model, insisted that
the age of twenty-five years was as early as any discreet young lady
should think of incurring the responsibilities, etc., etc. Long before
Iris had reached that age, she was the wife of a young Maryland engineer,
directing some of the vast constructions of his native State,--where he
was growing rich fast enough to be able to decline that famous Russian
offer which would have made him a kind of nabob in a few years.  Iris
does not write verse often, nowadays, but she sometimes draws.  The last
sketch of hers I have seen in my Southern visits was of two children, a
boy and girl, the youngest holding a silver goblet, like the one she held
that evening when I--I was so struck with her statue-like beauty.  If in
the later, summer months you find the grass marked with footsteps around
that grave on Copp's Hill I told you of, and flowers scattered over it,
you may be sure that Iris is here on her annual visit to the home of her
childhood and that excellent lady whose only fault was, that Nature had
written out her list of virtues an ruled paper, and forgotten to rub out
the lines.

One thing more I must mention.  Being on the Common, last Sunday, I was
attracted by the cheerful spectacle of a well-dressed and somewhat
youthful papa wheeling a very elegant little carriage containing a stout
baby.  A buxom young lady watched them from one of the stone seats, with
an interest which could be nothing less than maternal.  I at once
recognized my old friend, the young fellow whom we called John.  He was
delighted to see me, introduced me to "Madam," and would have the lusty
infant out of the carriage, and hold him up for me to look at.

Now, then,--he said to the two-year-old,--show the gentleman how you hit
from the shoulder.  Whereupon the little imp pushed his fat fist straight
into my eye, to his father's intense satisfaction.

Fust-rate little chap,--said the papa.--Chip of the old block. Regl'r
little Johnny, you know.

I was so much pleased to find the young fellow settled in life, and
pushing about one of "them little articles" he had seemed to want so
much, that I took my "punishment" at the hands of the infant pugilist
with great equanimity.--And how is the old boarding-house?--I asked.

A 1,--he answered.--Painted and papered as good as new.  Gabs in all the
rooms up to the skyparlors.  Old woman's layin' up money, they say.
Means to send Ben Franklin to college.  Just then the first bell rang for
church, and my friend, who, I understand, has become a most exemplary
member of society, said he must be off to get ready for meetin', and told
the young one to "shake dada," which he did with his closed fist, in a
somewhat menacing manner.  And so the young man John, as we used to call
him, took the pole of the miniature carriage, and pushed the small
pugilist before him homewards, followed, in a somewhat leisurely way, by
his pleasant-looking lady-companion, and I sent a sigh and a smile after
him.

That evening, as soon as it was dark, I could not help going round by the
old boarding-house.  The "gahs" was lighted, but the curtains, or more
properly, the painted shades; were not down.  And so I stood there and
looked in along the table where the boarders sat at the evening
meal,--our old breakfast-table, which some of us feel as if we knew so
well.  There were new faces at it, but also old and familiar ones.--The
landlady, in a wonderfully smart cap, looking young, comparatively
speaking, and as if half the wrinkles had been ironed out of her
forehead.--Her daughter, in rather dressy half-mourning, with a vast
brooch of jet, got up, apparently, to match the gentleman next her, who
was in black costume and sandy hair,--the last rising straight from his
forehead, like the marble flame one sometimes sees at the top of a
funeral urn.--The Poor Relation, not in absolute black, but in a stuff
with specks of white; as much as to say, that, if there were any more
Hirams left to sigh for her, there were pin-holes in the night of her
despair, through which a ray of hope might find its way to an adorer.
--Master Benjamin Franklin, grown taller of late, was in the act of
splitting his face open with a wedge of pie, so that his features were
seen to disadvantage for the moment.--The good old gentleman was sitting
still and thoughtful.  All at once he turned his face toward the window
where I stood, and, just as if he had seen me, smiled his benignant
smile.  It was a recollection of some past pleasant moment; but it fell
upon me like the blessing of a father.

I kissed my hand to them all, unseen as I stood in the outer darkness;
and as I turned and went my way, the table and all around it faded into
the realm of twilight shadows and of midnight dreams.

                  ---------------------

And so my year's record is finished. The Professor has talked less than
his predecessor, but he has heard and seen more.  Thanks to all those
friends who from time to time have sent their messages of kindly
recognition and fellow-feeling!  Peace to all such as may have been vexed
in spirit by any utterance these pages have repeated!  They will,
doubtless, forget for the moment the difference in the hues of truth we
look at through our human prisms, and join in singing (inwardly) this
hymn to the Source of the light we all need to lead us, and the warmth
which alone can make us all brothers.


               A SUN-DAY HYMN.

     Lord of all being! throned afar,
     Thy glory flames from sun and star,
     Centre and soul of every sphere,
     Yet to each loving heart how near!

     Sun of our life, thy quickening ray
     Sheds on our path the glow of day;
     Star of our hope, thy softened light
     Cheers the long watches of the night.

     Our midnight is thy smile withdrawn;
     Our noontide is thy gracious dawn;
     Our rainbow arch thy mercy's sign;
     All, save the clouds of sin, are thine!

     Lord of all life, below, above,
     Whose light is truth, whose warmth is love,
     Before thy ever-blazing throne
     We ask no lustre of our own.

     Grant us thy truth to make us free,
     And kindling hearts that burn for thee,
     Till all thy living altars claim
     One holy light, one heavenly flame.
     One holy light, one heavenly flame.






THE POET AT THE BREAKFAST TABLE

by Oliver Wendell Holmes



PREFACE.

In this, the third series of Breakfast-Table conversations, a slight
dramatic background shows off a few talkers and writers, aided by certain
silent supernumeraries.  The machinery is much like that of the two
preceding series.  Some of the characters must seem like old
acquaintances to those who have read the former papers.  As I read these
over for the first time for a number of years, I notice one character;
presenting a class of beings who have greatly multiplied during the
interval which separates the earlier and later Breakfast-Table papers,--I
mean the scientific specialists.  The entomologist, who confines himself
rigidly to the study of the coleoptera, is intended to typify this class.
The subdivision of labor, which, as we used to be told, required fourteen
different workmen to make a single pin, has reached all branches of
knowledge. We find new terms in all the Professions, implying that
special provinces have been marked off, each having its own school of
students.  In theology we have many curious subdivisions; among the rest
eschatology, that is to say, the geography, geology, etc., of the
"undiscovered country;" in medicine, if the surgeon who deals with
dislocations of the right shoulder declines to meddle with a displacement
on the other side, we are not surprised, but ring the bell of the
practitioner who devotes himself to injuries of the left shoulder.

On the other hand, we have had or have the encyclopaedic intelligences
like Cuvier, Buckle, and more emphatically Herbert Spencer, who take all
knowledge, or large fields of it, to be their province.  The author of
"Thoughts on the Universe" has something in common with these, but he
appears also to have a good deal about him of what we call the humorist;
that is, an individual with a somewhat heterogeneous personality, in
which various distinctly human elements are mixed together, so as to form
a kind of coherent and sometimes pleasing whole, which is to a
symmetrical character as a breccia is to a mosaic.

As for the Young Astronomer, his rhythmical discourse may be taken as
expressing the reaction of what some would call "the natural man" against
the unnatural beliefs which he found in that lower world to which he
descended by day from his midnight home in the firmament.

I have endeavored to give fair play to the protest of gentle and
reverential conservatism in the letter of the Lady, which was not copied
from, but suggested by, one which I received long ago from a lady bearing
an honored name, and which I read thoughtfully and with profound respect.

December, 1882.




PREFACE TO THE NEW EDITION.

It is now nearly twenty years since this book was published.  Being the
third of the Breakfast-Table series, it could hardly be expected to
attract so much attention as the earlier volumes.  Still, I had no reason
to be disappointed with its reception.  It took its place with the
others, and was in some points a clearer exposition of my views and
feelings than either of the other books, its predecessors.  The poems
"Homesick in Heaven" and the longer group of passages coming from the
midnight reveries of the Young Astronomer have thoughts in them not so
fully expressed elsewhere in my writings.

The first of these two poems is at war with our common modes of thought.
In looking forward to rejoining in a future state those whom we have
loved on earth,--as most of us hope and many of us believe we shall,--we
are apt to forget that the same individuality is remembered by one
relative as a babe, by another as an adult in the strength of maturity,
and by a third as a wreck with little left except its infirmities and its
affections.  The main thought of this poem is a painful one to some
persons.  They have so closely associated life with its accidents that
they expect to see their departed friends in the costume of the time in
which they best remember them, and feel as if they should meet the spirit
of their grandfather with his wig and cane, as they habitually recall him
to memory.

The process of scientific specialization referred to and illustrated in
this record has been going on more actively than ever during these last
twenty years.  We have only to look over the lists of the Faculties and
teachers of our Universities to see the subdivision of labor carried out
as never before.  The movement is irresistible; it brings with it
exactness, exhaustive knowledge, a narrow but complete self-satisfaction,
with such accompanying faults as pedantry, triviality, and the kind of
partial blindness which belong to intellectual myopia.  The specialist is
idealized almost into sublimity in Browning's "Burial of the Grammarian."
We never need fear that he will undervalue himself.  To be the supreme
authority on anything is a satisfaction to self-love next door to the
precious delusions of dementia.  I have never pictured a character more
contented with himself than the "Scarabee" of this story.

BEVERLY FARMS, MASS., August 1, 1891.
O. W. H.

                        THE POET

                         AT THE

                     BREAKFAST-TABLE.
I

The idea of a man's "interviewing" himself is rather odd, to be sure. But
then that is what we are all of us doing every day.  I talk half the time
to find out my own thoughts, as a school-boy turns his pockets inside out
to see what is in them.  One brings to light all sorts of personal
property he had forgotten in his inventory.

--You don't know what your thoughts are going to be beforehand? said the
"Member of the Haouse," as he calls himself.

--Why, of course I don't.  Bless your honest legislative soul, I suppose
I have as many bound volumes of notions of one kind and another in my
head as you have in your Representatives' library up there at the State
House.  I have to tumble them over and over, and open them in a hundred
places, and sometimes cut the leaves here and there, to find what I think
about this and that.  And a good many people who flatter themselves they
are talking wisdom to me, are only helping me to get at the shelf and the
book and the page where I shall find my own opinion about the matter in
question.

--The Member's eyes began to look heavy.

--It 's a very queer place, that receptacle a man fetches his talk out
of.  The library comparison does n't exactly hit it.  You stow away some
idea and don't want it, say for ten years.  When it turns up at last it
has got so jammed and crushed out of shape by the other ideas packed with
it, that it is no more like what it was than a raisin is like a grape on
the vine, or a fig from a drum like one hanging on the tree.  Then,
again, some kinds of thoughts breed in the dark of one's mind like the
blind fishes in the Mammoth Cave.  We can't see them and they can't see
us; but sooner or later the daylight gets in and we find that some cold,
fishy little negative has been spawning all over our beliefs, and the
brood of blind questions it has given birth to are burrowing round and
under and butting their blunt noses against the pillars of faith we
thought the whole world might lean on.  And then, again, some of our old
beliefs are dying out every year, and others feed on them and grow fat,
or get poisoned as the case may be.  And so, you see, you can't tell what
the thoughts are that you have got salted down, as one may say, till you
run a streak of talk through them, as the market people run a butterscoop
through a firkin.

Don't talk, thinking you are going to find out your neighbor, for you
won't do it, but talk to find out yourself.  There is more of you--and
less of you, in spots, very likely--than you know.

--The Member gave a slight but unequivocal start just here.  It does seem
as if perpetual somnolence was the price of listening to other people's
wisdom.  This was one of those transient nightmares that one may have in
a doze of twenty seconds.  He thought a certain imaginary Committee of
Safety of a certain imaginary Legislature was proceeding to burn down his
haystack, in accordance with an Act, entitled an Act to make the Poor
Richer by making the Rich Poorer.  And the chairman of the committee was
instituting a forcible exchange of hats with him, to his manifest
disadvantage, for he had just bought him a new beaver.  He told this
dream afterwards to one of the boarders.

There was nothing very surprising, therefore, in his asking a question
not very closely related to what had gone before.

--Do you think they mean business?

--I beg your pardon, but it would be of material assistance to me in
answering your question if I knew who "they" might happen to be.

--Why, those chaps that are setting folks on to burn us all up in our
beds.  Political firebugs we call 'em up our way.  Want to substitoot the
match-box for the ballot-box.  Scare all our old women half to death.

--Oh--ah--yes--to be sure.  I don't believe they say what the papers put
in their mouths any more than that a friend of mine wrote the letter
about Worcester's and Webster's Dictionaries, that he had to disown the
other day.  These newspaper fellows are half asleep when they make up
their reports at two or three o'clock in the morning, and fill out the
speeches to suit themselves.  I do remember some things that sounded
pretty bad,--about as bad as nitro-glycerine, for that matter.  But I
don't believe they ever said 'em, when they spoke their pieces, or if
they said 'em I know they did n't mean 'em.  Something like this, wasn't
it?  If the majority didn't do something the minority wanted 'em to, then
the people were to burn up our cities, and knock us down and jump on our
stomachs.  That was about the kind of talk, as the papers had it; I don't
wonder it scared the old women.

--The Member was wide awake by this time.

--I don't seem to remember of them partickler phrases, he said.

--Dear me, no; only levelling everything smack, and trampling us under
foot, as the reporters made it out.  That means FIRE, I take it, and
knocking you down and stamping on you, whichever side of your person
happens to be uppermost.  Sounded like a threat; meant, of course, for a
warning.  But I don't believe it was in the piece as they spoke
it,--could n't have been.  Then, again, Paris wasn't to blame,--as much
as to say--so the old women thought--that New York or Boston would n't be
to blame if it did the same thing.  I've heard of political gatherings
where they barbecued an ox, but I can't think there 's a party in this
country that wants to barbecue a city.  But it is n't quite fair to
frighten the old women.  I don't doubt there are a great many people
wiser than I am that would n't be hurt by a hint I am going to give them.
It's no matter what you say when you talk to yourself, but when you talk
to other people, your business is to use words with reference to the way
in which those other people are like to understand them.  These pretended
inflammatory speeches, so reported as to seem full of combustibles, even
if they were as threatening as they have been represented, would do no
harm if read or declaimed in a man's study to his books, or by the
sea-shore to the waves.  But they are not so wholesome moral
entertainment for the dangerous classes.  Boys must not touch off their
squibs and crackers too near the powder-magazine.  This kind of speech
does n't help on the millennium much.

--It ain't jest the thing to grease your ex with ile o' vitrul, said the
Member.

--No, the wheel of progress will soon stick fast if you do.  You can't
keep a dead level long, if you burn everything down flat to make it.
Why, bless your soul, if all the cities of the world were reduced ashes,
you'd have a new set of millionnaires in a couple of years or so, out of
the trade in potash.  In the mean time, what is the use of setting the
man with the silver watch against the man with the gold watch, and the
man without any watch against them both?

--You can't go agin human natur', said the Member

--You speak truly.  Here we are travelling through desert together like
the children of Israel.  Some pick up more manna and catch more quails
than others and ought to help their hungry neighbors more than they do;
that will always be so until we come back to primitive Christianity, the
road to which does not seem to be via Paris, just now; but we don't want
the incendiary's pillar of a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night
to lead us in the march to civilization, and we don't want a Moses who
will smite rock, not to bring out water for our thirst, but petroleum to
burn us all up with.

--It is n't quite fair to run an opposition to the other funny speaker,
Rev. Petroleum V.  What 's-his-name,--spoke up an anonymous boarder.

--You may have been thinking, perhaps, that it was I,--I, the Poet, who
was the chief talker in the one-sided dialogue to which you have been
listening.  If so, you were mistaken.  It was the old man in the
spectacles with large round glasses and the iron-gray hair.  He does a
good deal of the talking at our table, and, to tell the truth, I rather
like to hear him.  He stirs me up, and finds me occupation in various
ways, and especially, because he has good solid prejudices, that one can
rub against, and so get up and let off a superficial intellectual
irritation, just as the cattle rub their backs against a rail (you
remember Sydney Smith's contrivance in his pasture) or their sides
against an apple-tree (I don't know why they take to these so
particularly, but you will often find the trunk of an apple-tree as brown
and smooth as an old saddle at the height of a cow's ribs).  I think they
begin rubbing in cold blood, and then, you know, l'appetit vient en
mangeant, the more they rub the more they want to. That is the way to use
your friend's prejudices.  This is a sturdy-looking personage of a good
deal more than middle age, his face marked with strong manly furrows,
records of hard thinking and square stand-up fights with life and all its
devils.  There is a slight touch of satire in his discourse now and then,
and an odd way of answering one that makes it hard to guess how much more
or less he means than he seems to say.  But he is honest, and always has
a twinkle in his eye to put you on your guard when he does not mean to be
taken quite literally.  I think old Ben Franklin had just that look.  I
know his great-grandson (in pace!) had it, and I don't doubt he took it
in the straight line of descent, as he did his grand intellect.

The Member of the Haouse evidently comes from one of the lesser inland
centres of civilization, where the flora is rich in checkerberries and
similar bounties of nature, and the fauna lively with squirrels,
wood-chucks, and the like; where the leading sportsmen snare patridges,
as they are called, and "hunt" foxes with guns; where rabbits are
entrapped in "figgery fours," and trout captured with the unpretentious
earth-worm, instead of the gorgeous fly; where they bet prizes for butter
and cheese, and rag-carpets executed by ladies more than seventy years of
age; where whey wear dress-coats before dinner, and cock their hats on
one side when they feel conspicuous and distinshed; where they say--Sir
to you in their common talk and have other Arcadian and bucolic ways
which are highly unobjectionable, but are not so much admired in cities,
where the people are said to be not half so virtuous.

There is with us a boy of modest dimensions, not otherwise especially
entitled to the epithet, who ought be six or seven years old, to judge by
the gap left by his front milk teeth, these having resigned in favor of
their successors, who have not yet presented their credentials.  He is
rather old for an enfant terrible, and quite too young to have grown into
the bashfulness of adolescence; but he has some of the qualities of both
these engaging periods of development, The member of the Haouse calls him
"Bub," invariably, such term I take to be an abbreviation of "Beelzeb,"
as "bus" is the short form of "omnibus."  Many eminently genteel persons,
whose manners make them at home anywhere, being evidently unaware of true
derivation of this word, are in the habit of addressing all unknown
children by one of the two terms, "bub" and "sis," which they consider
endears them greatly to the young people, and recommends them to the
acquaintance of their honored parents, if these happen to accompany them.
The other boarders commonly call our diminutive companion That Boy.  He
is a sort of expletive at the table, serving to stop gaps, taking the
same place a washer does that makes a loose screw fit, and contriving to
get driven in like a wedge between any two chairs where there is a
crevice.  I shall not call that boy by the monosyllable referred to,
because, though he has many impish traits at present, he may become
civilized and humanized by being in good company.  Besides, it is a term
which I understand is considered vulgar by the nobility and gentry of the
Mother Country, and it is not to be found in Mr. Worcester's Dictionary,
on which, as is well known, the literary men of this metropolis are by
special statute allowed to be sworn in place of the Bible.  I know one,
certainly, who never takes his oath on any other dictionary, any
advertising fiction to the contrary, notwithstanding.

I wanted to write out my account of some of the other boarders, but a
domestic occurrence--a somewhat prolonged visit from the landlady, who is
rather too anxious that I should be comfortable broke in upon the
continuity of my thoughts, and occasioned--in short, I gave up writing
for that day.

--I wonder if anything like this ever happened. Author writing, jacks?"

    "To be, or not to be: that is the question
     Whether 't is nobl--"

--"William, shall we have pudding to-day, or flapjacks?"

--"Flapjacks, an' it please thee, Anne, or a pudding, for that matter; or
what thou wilt, good woman, so thou come not betwixt me and my thought."

--Exit Mistress Anne, with strongly accented closing of the door and
murmurs to the effect: "Ay, marry, 't is well for thee to talk as if thou
hadst no stomach to fill.  We poor wives must swink for our masters,
while they sit in their arm-chairs growing as great in the girth through
laziness as that ill-mannered fat man William hath writ of in his books
of players' stuff.  One had as well meddle with a porkpen, which hath
thorns all over him, as try to deal with William when his eyes be rolling
in that mad way."

William--writing once more--after an exclamation in strong English of the
older pattern,--

     "Whether 't is nobler--nobler--nobler--"

To do what?  O these women! these women! to have puddings or flapjacks!
Oh!--

    "Whether 't is nobler--in the mind--to suffer
     The slings--and arrows--of--"

Oh!  Oh! these women!  I will e'en step over to the parson's and have a
cup of sack with His Reverence for methinks Master Hamlet hath forgot
that which was just now on his lips to speak.

So I shall have to put off making my friends acquainted with the other
boarders, some of whom seem to me worth studying and describing.  I have
something else of a graver character for my readers.  I am talking, you
know, as a poet; I do not say I deserve the name, but I have taken it,
and if you consider me at all it must be in that aspect.  You will,
therefore, be willing to run your eyes over a few pages read, of course
by request, to a select party of the boarders.

          THE GAMBREL-ROOFED HOUSE AND ITS OUTLOOK.

               A PANORAMA, WITH SIDE-SHOWS.

My birthplace, the home of my childhood and earlier and later boyhood,
has within a few months passed out of the ownership of my family into the
hands of that venerable Alma Mater who seems to have renewed her youth,
and has certainly repainted her dormitories.  In truth, when I last
revisited that familiar scene and looked upon the flammantia mania of the
old halls, "Massachusetts" with the dummy clock-dial, "Harvard" with the
garrulous belfry, little "Holden" with the sculptured unpunishable cherub
over its portal, and the rest of my early brick-and-mortar acquaintances,
I could not help saying to myself that I had lived to see the peaceable
establishment of the Red Republic of Letters.

Many of the things I shall put down I have no doubt told before in a
fragmentary way, how many I cannot be quite sure, as I do not very often
read my own prose works.  But when a man dies a great deal is said of him
which has often been said in other forms, and now this dear old house is
dead to me in one sense, and I want to gather up my recollections and
wind a string of narrative round them, tying them up like a nosegay for
the last tribute: the same blossoms in it I have often laid on its
threshold while it was still living for me.

We Americans are all cuckoos,--we make our homes in the nests of other
birds.  I have read somewhere that the lineal descendants of the man who
carted off the body of William Rufus, with Walter Tyrrel's arrow sticking
in it, have driven a cart (not absolutely the same one, I suppose) in the
New Forest, from that day to this.  I don't quite understand Mr. Ruskin's
saying (if he said it) that he couldn't get along in a country where
there were no castles, but I do think we lose a great deal in living
where there are so few permanent homes.  You will see how much I parted
with which was not reckoned in the price paid for the old homestead.

I shall say many things which an uncharitable reader might find fault
with as personal.  I should not dare to call myself a poet if I did not;
for if there is anything that gives one a title to that name, it is that
his inner nature is naked and is not ashamed.  But there are many such
things I shall put in words, not because they are personal, but because
they are human, and are born of just such experiences as those who hear
or read what I say are like to have had in greater or less measure.  I
find myself so much like other people that I often wonder at the
coincidence.  It was only the other day that I sent out a copy of verses
about my great-grandmother's picture, and I was surprised to find how
many other people had portraits of their great-grandmothers or other
progenitors, about which they felt as I did about mine, and for whom I
had spoken, thinking I was speaking for myself only.  And so I am not
afraid to talk very freely with you, my precious reader or listener.  You
too, Beloved, were born somewhere and remember your birthplace or your
early home; for you some house is haunted by recollections; to some roof
you have bid farewell. Your hand is upon mine, then, as I guide my pen.
Your heart frames the responses to the litany of my remembrance.  For
myself it is a tribute of affection I am rendering, and I should put it
on record for my own satisfaction, were there none to read or to listen.

I hope you will not say that I have built a pillared portico of
introduction to a humble structure of narrative.  For when you look at
the old gambrel-roofed house, you will see an unpretending mansion, such
as very possibly you were born in yourself, or at any rate such a place
of residence as your minister or some of your well-to-do country cousins
find good enough, but not at all too grand for them.  We have stately old
Colonial palaces in our ancient village, now a city, and a thriving
one,--square-fronted edifices that stand back from the vulgar highway,
with folded arms, as it were; social fortresses of the time when the
twilight lustre of the throne reached as far as our half-cleared
settlement, with a glacis before them in the shape of a long broad
gravel-walk, so that in King George's time they looked as formidably to
any but the silk-stocking gentry as Gibraltar or Ehrenbreitstein to a
visitor without the password.  We forget all this in the kindly welcome
they give us to-day; for some of them are still standing and doubly
famous, as we all know.  But the gambrel-roofed house, though stately
enough for college dignitaries and scholarly clergymen, was not one of
those old Tory, Episcopal-church-goer's strongholds.  One of its doors
opens directly upon the green, always called the Common; the other,
facing the south, a few steps from it, over a paved foot-walk, on the
other side of which is the miniature front yard, bordered with lilacs and
syringas.  The honest mansion makes no pretensions.  Accessible,
companionable, holding its hand out to all, comfortable, respectable, and
even in its way dignified, but not imposing, not a house for his
Majesty's Counsellor, or the Right Reverend successor of Him who had not
where to lay his head, for something like a hundred and fifty years it
has stood in its lot, and seen the generations of men come and go like
the leaves of the forest.  I passed some pleasant hours, a few years
since, in the Registry of Deeds and the Town Records, looking up the
history of the old house.  How those dear friends of mine, the
antiquarians, for whose grave councils I compose my features on the too
rare Thursdays when I am at liberty to meet them, in whose human
herbarium the leaves and blossoms of past generations are so carefully
spread out and pressed and laid away, would listen to an expansion of the
following brief details into an Historical Memoir!

The estate was the third lot of the eighth "Squadron" (whatever that
might be), and in the year 1707 was allotted in the distribution of
undivided lands to "Mr. ffox," the Reverend Jabez Fox of Woburn, it may
be supposed, as it passed from his heirs to the first Jonathan Hastings;
from him to his son, the long remembered College Steward; from him in the
year 1792 to the Reverend Eliphalet Pearson, Professor of Hebrew and
other Oriental languages in Harvard College, whose large personality swam
into my ken when I was looking forward to my teens; from him the
progenitors of my unborn self.

I wonder if there are any such beings nowadays as the great Eliphalet,
with his large features and conversational basso profundo, seemed to me.
His very name had something elephantine about it, and it seemed to me
that the house shook from cellar to garret at his footfall.  Some have
pretended that he had Olympian aspirations, and wanted to sit in the seat
of Jove and bear the academic thunderbolt and the aegis inscribed Christo
et Ecclesiae.  It is a common weakness enough to wish to find one's self
in an empty saddle; Cotton Mather was miserable all his days, I am
afraid, after that entry in his Diary: "This Day Dr. Sewall was chosen
President, for his Piety."

There is no doubt that the men of the older generation look bigger and
more formidable to the boys whose eyes are turned up at their venerable
countenances than the race which succeeds them, to the same boys grown
older.  Everything is twice as large, measured on a three-year-olds
three-foot scale as on a thirty-year-olds six-foot scale; but age
magnifies and aggravates persons out of due proportion.  Old people are a
kind of monsters to little folks; mild manifestations of the terrible, it
may be, but still, with their white locks and ridged and grooved
features, which those horrid little eyes exhaust of their details, like
so many microscopes not exactly what human beings ought to be.  The
middle-aged and young men have left comparatively faint impressions in my
memory, but how grandly the procession of the old clergymen who filled
our pulpit from time to time, and passed the day under our roof, marches
before my closed eyes!  At their head the most venerable David Osgood,
the majestic minister of Medford, with massive front and shaggy
over-shadowing eyebrows; following in the train, mild-eyed John Foster of
Brighton, with the lambent aurora of a smile about his pleasant mouth,
which not even the "Sabbath" could subdue to the true Levitical aspect;
and bulky Charles Steams of Lincoln, author of "The Ladies' Philosophy of
Love.  A Poem.  1797" (how I stared at him! he was the first living
person ever pointed out to me as a poet); and Thaddeus Mason Harris of
Dorchester (the same who, a poor youth, trudging along, staff in hand,
being then in a stress of sore need, found all at once that somewhat was
adhering to the end of his stick, which somewhat proved to be a gold ring
of price, bearing the words, "God speed thee, Friend!"), already in
decadence as I remember him, with head slanting forward and downward as
if looking for a place to rest in after his learned labors; and that
other Thaddeus, the old man of West Cambridge, who outwatched the rest so
long after they had gone to sleep in their own churchyards, that it
almost seemed as if he meant to sit up until the morning of the
resurrection; and bringing up the rear, attenuated but vivacious little
Jonathan Homer of Newton, who was, to look upon, a kind of expurgated,
reduced and Americanized copy of Voltaire, but very unlike him in
wickedness or wit.  The good-humored junior member of our family always
loved to make him happy by setting him chirruping about Miles Coverdale's
Version, and the Bishop's Bible, and how he wrote to his friend Sir Isaac
(Coffin) about something or other, and how Sir Isaac wrote back that he
was very much pleased with the contents of his letter, and so on about
Sir Isaac, ad libitum,--for the admiral was his old friend, and he was
proud of him.  The kindly little old gentleman was a collector of Bibles,
and made himself believe he thought he should publish a learned
Commentary some day or other; but his friends looked for it only in the
Greek Calends,--say on the 31st of April, when that should come round, if
you would modernize the phrase.  I recall also one or two exceptional and
infrequent visitors with perfect distinctness: cheerful Elijah Kellogg, a
lively missionary from the region of the Quoddy Indians, with much
hopeful talk about Sock Bason and his tribe; also poor old
Poor-house-Parson Isaac Smith, his head going like a China mandarin, as
he discussed the possibilities of the escape of that distinguished
captive whom he spoke of under the name, if I can reproduce phonetically
its vibrating nasalities of "General Mmbongaparty,"--a name suggestive to
my young imagination of a dangerous, loose-jointed skeleton, threatening
us all like the armed figure of Death in my little New England Primer.

I have mentioned only the names of those whose images come up pleasantly
before me, and I do not mean to say anything which any descendant might
not read smilingly.  But there were some of the black-coated gentry whose
aspect was not so agreeable to me.  It is very curious to me to look back
on my early likes and dislikes, and see how as a child I was attracted or
repelled by such and such ministers, a good deal, as I found out long
afterwards, according to their theological beliefs.  On the whole, I
think the old-fashioned New England divine softening down into
Arminianism was about as agreeable as any of them.  And here I may
remark, that a mellowing rigorist is always a much pleasanter object to
contemplate than a tightening liberal, as a cold day warming up to 32
Fahrenheit is much more agreeable than a warm one chilling down to the
same temperature. The least pleasing change is that kind of mental
hemiplegia which now and then attacks the rational side of a man at about
the same period of life when one side of the body is liable to be
palsied, and in fact is, very probably, the same thing as palsy, in
another form. The worst of it is that the subjects of it never seem to
suspect that they are intellectual invalids, stammerers and cripples at
best, but are all the time hitting out at their old friends with the well
arm, and calling them hard names out of their twisted mouths.

It was a real delight to have one of those good, hearty, happy, benignant
old clergymen pass the Sunday, with us, and I can remember some whose
advent made the day feel almost like "Thanksgiving." But now and then
would come along a clerical visitor with a sad face and a wailing voice,
which sounded exactly as if somebody must be lying dead up stairs, who
took no interest in us children, except a painful one, as being in a bad
way with our cheery looks, and did more to unchristianize us with his
woebegone ways than all his sermons were like to accomplish in the other
direction.  I remember one in particular, who twitted me so with my
blessings as a Christian child, and whined so to me about the naked black
children who, like the "Little Vulgar Boy," "had n't got no supper and
hadn't got no ma," and hadn't got no Catechism, (how I wished for the
moment I was a little black boy!) that he did more in that one day to
make me a heathen than he had ever done in a month to make a Christian
out of an infant Hottentot.  What a debt we owe to our friends of the
left centre, the Brooklyn and the Park Street and the Summer street
ministers; good, wholesome, sound-bodied, one-minded, cheerful-spirited
men, who have taken the place of those wailing poitrinaires with the
bandanna handkerchiefs round their meagre throats and a funeral service
in their forlorn physiognomies!  I might have been a minister myself, for
aught I know, if this clergyman had not looked and talked so like an
undertaker.

All this belongs to one of the side-shows, to which I promised those who
would take tickets to the main exhibition should have entrance gratis.
If I were writing a poem you would expect, as a matter of course, that
there would be a digression now and then.

To come back to the old house and its former tenant, the Professor of
Hebrew and other Oriental languages.  Fifteen years he lived with his
family under its roof.  I never found the slightest trace of him
until a few years ago, when I cleaned and brightened with pious hands
the brass lock of "the study," which had for many years been covered
with a thick coat of paint.  On that I found scratched; as with a
nail or fork, the following inscription:
                         E PE

Only that and nothing more, but the story told itself.  Master Edward
Pearson, then about as high as the lock, was disposed to immortalize
himself in monumental brass, and had got so far towards it, when a sudden
interruption, probably a smart box on the ear, cheated him of his fame,
except so far as this poor record may rescue it.  Dead long ago.  I
remember him well, a grown man, as a visitor at a later period; and, for
some reason, I recall him in the attitude of the Colossus of Rhodes,
standing full before a generous wood-fire, not facing it, but quite the
contrary, a perfect picture of the content afforded by a blazing hearth
contemplated from that point of view, and, as the heat stole through his
person and kindled his emphatic features, seeming to me a pattern of
manly beauty.  What a statue gallery of posturing friends we all have in
our memory!  The old Professor himself sometimes visited the house after
it had changed hands.  Of course, my recollections are not to be wholly
trusted, but I always think I see his likeness in a profile face to be
found among the illustrations of Rees's Cyclopaedia.  (See Plates, Vol.
IV., Plate 2, Painting, Diversities of the Human Face, Fig. 4.)

And now let us return to our chief picture.  In the days of my earliest
remembrance, a row of tall Lombardy poplars mounted guard on the western
side of the old mansion.  Whether, like the cypress, these trees suggest
the idea of the funeral torch or the monumental spire, whether their
tremulous leaves make wits afraid by sympathy with their nervous thrills,
whether the faint balsamic smell of their foliage and their closely
swathed limbs have in them vague hints of dead Pharaohs stiffened in
their cerements, I will guess; but they always seemed to me to give an of
sepulchral sadness to the house before which stood sentries.  Not so with
the row of elms which you may see leading up towards the western
entrance.  I think the patriarch of them all went over in the great gale
of 1815; I know I used to shake the youngest of them with my hands, stout
as it is now, with a trunk that would defy the bully of Crotona, or the
strong man whose liaison with the Lady Delilah proved so disastrous.

The College plain would be nothing without its elms.  As the long hair of
a woman is a glory to her, are these green tresses that bank themselves
against sky in thick clustered masses the ornament and the pride of the
classic green.  You know the "Washington elm," or if you do not, you had
better rekindle our patriotism by reading the inscription, which tells
you that under its shadow the great leader first drew his sword at the
head of an American army.  In a line with that you may see two others:
the coral fan, as I always called it from its resemblance in form to that
beautiful marine growth, and a third a little farther along.  I have
heard it said that all three were planted at the same time, and that the
difference of their growth is due to the slope of the ground,--the
Washington elm being lower than either of the others.  There is a row of
elms just in front of the old house on the south.  When I was a child the
one at the southwest corner was struck by lightning, and one of its limbs
and a long ribbon of bark torn away.  The tree never fully recovered its
symmetry and vigor, and forty years and more afterwards a second
thunderbolt crashed upon it and set its heart on fire, like those of the
lost souls in the Hall of Eblis.  Heaven had twice blasted it, and the
axe finished what the lightning had begun.

The soil of the University town is divided into patches of sandy and of
clayey ground.  The Common and the College green, near which the old
house stands, are on one of the sandy patches.  Four curses are the local
inheritance: droughts, dust, mud, and canker-worms.  I cannot but think
that all the characters of a region help to modify the children born in
it.  I am fond of making apologies for human nature, and I think I could
find an excuse for myself if I, too, were dry and barren and muddy-witted
and "cantankerous,"--disposed to get my back up, like those other natives
of the soil.

I know this, that the way Mother Earth treats a boy shapes out a kind of
natural theology for him.  I fell into Manichean ways of thinking from
the teaching of my garden experiences.  Like other boys in the country, I
had my patch of ground, to which, in the spring-time, I entrusted the
seeds furnished me, with a confident trust in their resurrection and
glorification in the better world of summer.  But I soon found that my
lines had fallen in a place where a vegetable growth had to run the
gauntlet of as many foes and dials as a Christian pilgrim.  Flowers would
not Blow; daffodils perished like criminals in their cone demned caps,
without their petals ever seeing daylight; roses were disfigured with
monstrous protrusions through their very centres,--something that looked
like a second bud pushing through the middle of the corolla; lettuces and
cabbages would not head; radishes knotted themselves until they looked
like centenerians' fingers; and on every stem, on every leaf, and both
sides of it, and at the root of everything that dew, was a professional
specialist in the shape of grub, caterpillar, aphis, or other expert,
whose business it was to devour that particular part, and help order the
whole attempt at vegetation.  Such experiences must influence a child
born to them.  A sandy soil, where nothing flourishes but weeds and evil
beasts of small dimensions, must breed different qualities in its human
offspring from one of those fat and fertile spots which the wit whom I
have once before noted described so happily that, if I quoted the
passage, its brilliancy would spoil one of my pages, as a diamond
breastpin sometimes kills the social effect of the wearer, who might have
passed for a gentleman without it.  Your arid patch of earth should seem
to the natural birthplace of the leaner virtues and the abler vices,--of
temperance and the domestic proprieties on the one hand, with a tendency
to light weights in groceries and provisions, and to clandestine
abstraction from the person on the other, as opposed to the free
hospitality, the broadly planned burglaries, and the largely conceived
homicides of our rich Western alluvial regions.  Yet Nature is never
wholly unkind.  Economical as she was in my unparadised Eden, hard as it
was to make some of my floral houris unveil, still the damask roses
sweetened the June breezes, the bladed and plumed flower-de-luces
unfolded their close-wrapped cones, and larkspurs and lupins, lady's
delights,--plebeian manifestations of the pansy,--self-sowing marigolds,
hollyhocks, the forest flowers of two seasons, and the perennial lilacs
and syringas,--all whispered to' the winds blowing over them that some
caressing presence was around me.

Beyond the garden was "the field," a vast domain of four acres or
thereabout, by the measurement of after years, bordered to the north by a
fathomless chasm,--the ditch the base-ball players of the present era
jump over; on the east by unexplored territory; on the south by a barren
enclosure, where the red sorrel proclaimed liberty and equality under its
drapeau rouge, and succeeded in establishing a vegetable commune where
all were alike, poor, mean, sour, and uninteresting; and on the west by
the Common, not then disgraced by jealous enclosures, which make it look
like a cattle-market.  Beyond, as I looked round, were the Colleges, the
meeting-house, the little square market-house, long vanished; the
burial-ground where the dead Presidents stretched their weary bones under
epitaphs stretched out at as full length as their subjects; the pretty
church where the gouty Tories used to kneel on their hassocks; the
district schoolhouse, and hard by it Ma'am Hancock's cottage, never so
called in those days, but rather "tenfooter"; then houses scattered near
and far, open spaces, the shadowy elms, round hilltops in the distance,
and over all the great bowl of the sky. Mind you, this was the WORLD, as
I first knew it; terra veteribus cognita, as Mr. Arrowsmith would have
called it, if he had mapped the universe of my infancy:

But I am forgetting the old house again in the landscape.  The worst of a
modern stylish mansion is, that it has no place for ghosts.  I watched
one building not long since.  It had no proper garret, to begin with,
only a sealed interval between the roof and attics, where a spirit could
not be accommodated, unless it were flattened out like Ravel, Brother,
after the millstone had fallen on him.  There was not a nook or a corner
in the whole horse fit to lodge any respectable ghost, for every part was
as open to observation as a literary man's character and condition, his
figure and estate, his coat and his countenance, are to his (or her)
Bohemian Majesty on a tour of inspection through his (or her) subjects'
keyholes.

Now the old house had wainscots, behind which the mice were always
scampering and squeaking and rattling down the plaster, and enacting
family scenes and parlor theatricals.  It had a cellar where the cold
slug clung to the walls, and the misanthropic spider withdrew from the
garish day; where the green mould loved to grow, and the long white
potato-shoots went feeling along the floor, if haply they might find the
daylight; it had great brick pillars, always in a cold sweat with holding
up the burden they had been aching under day and night far a century and
more; it had sepulchral arches closed by rough doors that hung on hinges
rotten with rust, behind which doors, if there was not a heap of bones
connected with a mysterious disappearance of long ago, there well might
have been, for it was just the place to look for them.  It had a garret;
very nearly such a one as it seems to me one of us has described in one
of his books; but let us look at this one as I can reproduce it from
memory.  It has a flooring of laths with ridges of mortar squeezed up
between them, which if you tread on you will go to--the Lord have mercy
on you! where will you go to?--the same being crossed by narrow bridges
of boards, on which you may put your feet, but with fear and trembling.
Above you and around you are beams and joists, on some of which you may
see, when the light is let in, the marks of the conchoidal clippings of
the broadaxe, showing the rude way in which the timber was shaped as it
came, full of sap, from the neighboring forest.  It is a realm of
darkness and thick dust, and shroud-like cobwebs and dead things they
wrap in their gray folds.  For a garret is like a seashore, where wrecks
are thrown up and slowly go to pieces.  There is the cradle which the old
man you just remember was rocked in; there is the ruin of the bedstead he
died on; that ugly slanting contrivance used to be put under his pillow
in the days when his breath came hard; there is his old chair with both
arms gone, symbol of the desolate time when he had nothing earthly left
to lean on; there is the large wooden reel which the blear-eyed old
deacon sent the minister's lady, who thanked him graciously, and twirled
it smilingly, and in fitting season bowed it out decently to the limbo of
troublesome conveniences.  And there are old leather portmanteaus, like
stranded porpoises, their mouths gaping in gaunt hunger for the food with
which they used to be gorged to bulging repletion; and old brass
andirons, waiting until time shall revenge them on their paltry
substitutes, and they shall have their own again, and bring with them the
fore-stick and the back-log of ancient days; and the empty churn, with
its idle dasher, which the Nancys and Phoebes, who have left their
comfortable places to the Bridgets and Norahs, used to handle to good
purpose; and the brown, shaky old spinning-wheel, which was running, it
may be, in the days when they were hinging the Salem witches.

Under the dark and haunted garret were attic chambers which themselves
had histories.  On a pane in the northeastern chamber may be read these
names:

"John Tracy," "Robert Roberts," "Thomas Prince;" "Stultus" another hand
had added.  When I found these names a few years ago (wrong side up, for
the window had been reversed), I looked at once in the Triennial to find
them, for the epithet showed that they were probably students.  I found
them all under the years 1771 and 1773. Does it please their thin ghosts
thus to be dragged to the light of day?  Has "Stultus" forgiven the
indignity of being thus characterized?

The southeast chamber was the Library Hospital.  Every scholar should
have a book infirmary attached his library.  There should find a
peaceable refuge the many books, invalids from their birth, which are
sent "with the best regards of the Author"; the respected, but
unpresentable cripples which have lost cover; the odd volumes of honored
sets which go mourning all their days for their lost brother; the
school-books which have been so often the subjects of assault and
battery, that they look as if the police must know them by heart; these
and still more the pictured story-books, beginning with Mother Goose
(which a dear old friend of mine has just been amusing his philosophic
leisure with turning most ingeniously and happily into the tongues of
Virgil and Homer), will be precious mementos by and by, when children and
grandchildren come along.  What would I not give for that dear little
paper-bound quarto, in large and most legible type, on certain pages of
which the tender hand that was the shield of my infancy had crossed out
with deep black marks something awful, probably about BEARS, such as once
tare two-and-forty of us little folks for making faces, and the very name
of which made us hide our heads under the bedclothes.

I made strange acquaintances in that book infirmary up in the southeast
attic.  The "Negro Plot" at New York helped to implant a feeling in me
which it took Mr. Garrison a good many years to root out.  "Thinks I to
Myself," an old novel, which has been attributed to a famous statesman,
introduced me to a world of fiction which was not represented on the
shelves of the library proper, unless perhaps by Coelebs in Search of a
Wife, or allegories of the bitter tonic class, as the young doctor that
sits on the other side of the table would probably call them.  I always,
from an early age, had a keen eye for a story with a moral sticking out
of it, and gave it a wide berth, though in my later years I have myself
written a couple of "medicated novels," as one of my dearest and
pleasantest old friends wickedly called them, when somebody asked her if
she had read the last of my printed performances.  I forgave the satire
for the charming esprit of the epithet.  Besides the works I have
mentioned, there was an old, old Latin alchemy book, with the manuscript
annotations of some ancient Rosicrucian, in the pages of which I had a
vague notion that I might find the mighty secret of the Lapis
Philosophorum, otherwise called Chaos, the Dragon, the Green Lion, the
Quinta Essentia, the Soap of Sages, the Vinegar of Philosophers, the Dew
of Heavenly Grace, the Egg, the Old Man, the Sun, the Moon, and by all
manner of odd aliases, as I am assured by the plethoric little book
before me, in parchment covers browned like a meerschaum with the smoke
of furnaces and the thumbing of dead gold seekers, and the fingering of
bony-handed book-misers, and the long intervals of dusty slumber on the
shelves of the bouquiniste; for next year it will be three centuries old,
and it had already seen nine generations of men when I caught its eye
(Alchemiae Doctrina) and recognized it at pistol-shot distance as a
prize, among the breviaries and Heures and trumpery volumes of the old
open-air dealer who exposed his treasures under the shadow of St.
Sulpice.  I have never lost my taste for alchemy since I first got hold
of the Palladium Spagyricum of Peter John Faber, and sought--in vain, it
is true--through its pages for a clear, intelligible, and practical
statement of how I could turn my lead sinkers and the weights of tall
kitchen clock into good yellow gold, specific gravity 19.2, and
exchangeable for whatever I then wanted, and for many more things than I
was then aware of.  One of the greatest pleasures of childhood found in
the mysteries which it hides from the skepticism of the elders, and works
up into small mythologies of its own.  I have seen all this played over
again in adult life,--the same delightful bewilderment semi-emotional
belief in listening to the gaseous praises of this or that fantastic
system, that I found in the pleasing mirages conjured up for me by the
ragged old volume I used to pore over in the southeast attic-chamber.

The rooms of the second story, the chambers of birth and death, are
sacred to silent memories.

Let us go down to the ground-floor.  I should have begun with this, but
that the historical reminiscences of the old house have been recently
told in a most interesting memoir by a distinguished student of our local
history.  I retain my doubts about those "dents" on the floor of the
right-hand room, "the study" of successive occupants, said to have been
made by the butts of the Continental militia's firelocks, but this was
the cause to which the story told me in childhood laid them.  That
military consultations were held in that room when the house was General
Ward's headquarters, that the Provincial generals and colonels and other
men of war there planned the movement which ended in the fortifying of
Bunker's Hill, that Warren slept in the house the night before the
battle, that President Langdon went forth from the western door and
prayed for God's blessing on the men just setting forth on their bloody
expedition,--all these things have been told, and perhaps none of them
need be doubted.

But now for fifty years and more that room has been a meeting-ground for
the platoons and companies which range themselves at the scholar's word
of command.  Pleasant it is to think that the retreating host of books is
to give place to a still larger army of volumes, which have seen service
under the eye of a great commander. For here the noble collection of him
so freshly remembered as our silver-tongued orator, our erudite scholar,
our honored College President, our accomplished statesman, our courtly
ambassador, are to be reverently gathered by the heir of his name,
himself not unworthy to be surrounded by that august assembly of the wise
of all ages and of various lands and languages.

Could such a many-chambered edifice have stood a century and a half and
not have had its passages of romance to bequeath their lingering legends
to the after-time?  There are other names on some of the small
window-panes, which must have had young flesh-and-blood owners, and there
is one of early date which elderly persons have whispered was borne by a
fair woman, whose graces made the house beautiful in the eyes of the
youth of that time.  One especially--you will find the name of Fortescue
Vernon, of the class of 1780, in the Triennial Catalogue--was a favored
visitor to the old mansion; but he went over seas, I think they told me,
and died still young, and the name of the maiden which is scratched on
the windowpane was never changed.  I am telling the story honestly, as I
remember it, but I may have colored it unconsciously, and the legendary
pane may be broken before this for aught I know.  At least, I have named
no names except the beautiful one of the supposed hero of the romantic
story.

It was a great happiness to have been born in an old house haunted by
such recollections, with harmless ghosts walking its corridors, with
fields of waving grass and trees and singing birds, and that vast
territory of four or five acres around it to give a child the sense that
he was born to a noble principality.  It has been a great pleasure to
retain a certain hold upon it for so many years; and since in the natural
course of things it must at length pass into other hands, it is a
gratification to see the old place making itself tidy for a new tenant,
like some venerable dame who is getting ready to entertain a neighbor of
condition.  Not long since a new cap of shingles adorned this ancient
mother among the village--now city--mansions.  She has dressed herself
in brighter colors than she has hitherto worn, so they tell me, within
the last few days.  She has modernized her aspects in several ways; she
has rubbed bright the glasses through which she looks at the Common and
the Colleges; and as the sunsets shine upon her through the flickering
leaves or the wiry spray of the elms I remember from my childhood, they
will glorify her into the aspect she wore when President Holyoke, father
of our long since dead centenarian, looked upon her in her youthful
comeliness.

The quiet corner formed by this and the neighboring residences has
changed less than any place I can remember.  Our kindly, polite, shrewd,
and humorous old neighbor, who in former days has served the town as
constable and auctioneer, and who bids fair to become the oldest
inhabitant of the city, was there when I was born, and is living there
to-day.  By and by the stony foot of the great University will plant
itself on this whole territory, and the private recollections which clung
so tenaciously and fondly to the place and its habitations will have died
with those who cherished them.

Shall they ever live again in the memory of those who loved them here
below?  What is this life without the poor accidents which made it our
own, and by which we identify ourselves?  Ah me!  I might like to be a
winged chorister, but still it seems to me I should hardly be quite happy
if I could not recall at will the Old House with the Long Entry, and the
White Chamber (where I wrote the first verses that made me known, with a
pencil, stans pede in uno, pretty, nearly), and the Little Parlor, and
the Study, and the old books in uniforms as varied as those of the
Ancient and Honorable Artillery Company used to be, if my memory serves
me right, and the front yard with the Star-of-Bethlehems growing,
flowerless, among the grass, and the dear faces to be seen no more there
or anywhere on this earthly place of farewells.

I have told my story.  I do not know what special gifts have been granted
or denied me; but this I know, that I am like so many others of my
fellow-creatures, that when I smile, I feel as if they must; when I cry,
I think their eyes fill; and it always seems to me that when I am most
truly myself I come nearest to them and am surest of being listened to by
the brothers and sisters of the larger family into which I was born so
long ago.  I have often feared they might be tired of me and what I tell
them.  But then, perhaps, would come a letter from some quiet body in
some out-of-the-way place, which showed me that I had said something
which another had often felt but never said, or told the secret of
another's heart in unburdening my own.  Such evidences that one is in the
highway of human experience and feeling lighten the footsteps
wonderfully.  So it is that one is encouraged to go on writing as long as
the world has anything that interests him, for he never knows how many of
his fellow-beings he may please or profit, and in how many places his
name will be spoken as that of a friend.

In the mood suggested by my story I have ventured on the poem that
follows.  Most people love this world more than they are willing to
confess, and it is hard to conceive ourselves weaned from it so as to
feel no emotion at the thought of its most sacred recollections, even
after a sojourn of years, as we should count the lapse of earthly
time,--in the realm where, sooner or later, all tears shall be wiped
away.  I hope, therefore, the title of my lines will not frighten those
who are little accustomed to think of men and women as human beings in
any state but the present.

                    HOMESICK IN HEAVEN.

                    THE DIVINE VOICE.

     Go seek thine earth-born sisters,--thus the Voice
     That all obey,--the sad and silent three;
     These only, while the hosts of heaven rejoice,
     Smile never: ask them what their sorrows be:

     And when the secret of their griefs they tell,
     Look on them with thy mild, half-human eyes;
     Say what thou wast on earth; thou knowest well;
     So shall they cease from unavailing sighs.

                    THE ANGEL.

    --Why thus, apart,--the swift-winged herald spake,
    --Sit ye with silent lips and unstrung lyres
     While the trisagion's blending chords awake
     In shouts of joy from all the heavenly choirs?

                    THE FIRST SPIRIT.

    --Chide not thy sisters,--thus the answer came;
    --Children of earth, our half-weaned nature clings
     To earth's fond memories, and her whispered name
     Untunes our quivering lips, our saddened strings;

     For there we loved, and where we love is home,
     Home that our feet may leave, but not our hearts,
     Though o'er us shine the jasper-lighted dome:--

     The chain may lengthen, but it never parts!

     Sometimes a sunlit sphere comes rolling by,
     And then we softly whisper,--can it be?
     And leaning toward the silvery orb, we try
     To hear the music of its murmuring sea;

     To catch, perchance, some flashing glimpse of green,
     Or breathe some wild-wood fragrance, wafted through
     The opening gates of pearl, that fold between
     The blinding splendors and the changeless blue.

                    THE ANGEL.

    --Nay, sister, nay! a single healing leaf
     Plucked from the bough of yon twelve-fruited tree,
     Would soothe such anguish,--deeper stabbing grief
     Has pierced thy throbbing heart--

                    THE FIRST SPIRIT.

                                      ---Ah, woe is me!
     I from my clinging babe was rudely torn;
     His tender lips a loveless bosom pressed
     Can I forget him in my life new born?
     O that my darling lay upon my breast!

                    THE ANGEL.

    --And thou?

                    THE SECOND SPIRIT.

                         I was a fair and youthful bride,

     The kiss of love still burns upon my cheek,
     He whom I worshipped, ever at my side,
    --Him through the spirit realm in vain I seek.

     Sweet faces turn their beaming eyes on mine;
     Ah! not in these the wished-for look I read;
     Still for that one dear human smile I pine;
     Thou and none other!--is the lover's creed.

                    THE ANGEL.

    --And whence thy sadness in a world of bliss
     Where never parting comes, nor mourner's tear?
     Art thou, too, dreaming of a mortal's kiss
     Amid the seraphs of the heavenly sphere?

                    THE THIRD SPIRIT.

    --Nay, tax not me with passion's wasting fire;
     When the swift message set my spirit free,
     Blind, helpless, lone, I left my gray-haired sire;
     My friends were many, he had none save me.

     I left him, orphaned, in the starless night;
     Alas, for him no cheerful morning's dawn!
     I wear the ransomed spirit's robe of white,
     Yet still I hear him moaning, She is gone!

                    THE ANGEL.

    --Ye know me not, sweet sisters?--All in vain
     Ye seek your lost ones in the shapes they wore;
     The flower once opened may not bud again,
     The fruit once fallen finds the stem no more.

     Child, lover, sire,--yea, all things loved below,
     Fair pictures damasked on a vapor's fold,
     Fade like the roseate flush, the golden glow,
     When the bright curtain of the day is rolled.

     I was the babe that slumbered on thy breast.
    --And, sister, mine the lips that called thee bride.
    --Mine were the silvered locks thy hand caressed,
     That faithful hand, my faltering footstep's guide!

     Each changing form, frail vesture of decay,
     The soul unclad forgets it once hath worn,
     Stained with the travel of the weary day,
     And shamed with rents from every wayside thorn.

     To lie, an infant, in thy fond embrace,
     To come with love's warm kisses back to thee,
     To show thine eyes thy gray-haired father's face,
     Not Heaven itself could grant; this may not be!

     Then spread your folded wings, and leave to earth
     The dust once breathing ye have mourned so long,
     Till Love, new risen, owns his heavenly birth,
     And sorrow's discords sweeten into song!




II

I am going to take it for granted now and henceforth, in my report of
what was said and what was to be seen at our table, that I have secured
one good, faithful, loving reader, who never finds fault, who never gets
sleepy over my pages, whom no critic can bully out of a liking for me,
and to whom I am always safe in addressing myself.  My one elect may be
man or woman, old or young, gentle or simple, living in the next block or
on a slope of Nevada, my fellow-countryman or an alien; but one such
reader I shall assume to exist and have always in my thought when I am
writing.

A writer is so like a lover!  And a talk with the right listener is so
like an arm-in-arm walk in the moonlight with the soft heartbeat just
felt through the folds of muslin and broadcloth!  But it takes very
little to spoil everything for writer, talker, lover.  There are a great
many cruel things besides poverty that freeze the genial current of the
soul, as the poet of the Elegy calls it.  Fire can stand any wind, but is
easily blown out, and then come smouldering and smoke, and profitless,
slow combustion without the cheerful blaze which sheds light all round
it.  The one Reader's hand may shelter the flame; the one blessed
ministering spirit with the vessel of oil may keep it bright in spite of
the stream of cold water on the other side doing its best to put it out.

I suppose, if any writer, of any distinguishable individuality, could
look into the hearts of all his readers, he might very probably find one
in his parish of a thousand or a million who honestly preferred him to
any other of his kind.  I have no doubt we have each one of us,
somewhere, our exact facsimile, so like us in all things except the
accidents of condition, that we should love each other like a pair of
twins, if our natures could once fairly meet.  I know I have my
counterpart in some State of this Union.  I feel sure that there is an
Englishman somewhere precisely like myself.  (I hope he does not drop his
h's, for it does not seem to me possible that the Royal Dane could have
remained faithful to his love for Ophelia, if she had addressed him as
'Amlet.) There is also a certain Monsieur, to me at this moment unknown,
and likewise a Herr Von Something, each of whom is essentially my double.
An Arab is at this moment eating dates, a mandarin is just sipping his
tea, and a South-Sea-Islander (with undeveloped possibilities) drinking
the milk of a cocoa-nut, each one of whom, if he had been born in the
gambrel-roofed house, and cultivated my little sand-patch, and grown up
in "the study" from the height of Walton's Polyglot Bible to that of the
shelf which held the Elzevir Tacitus and Casaubon's Polybius, with all
the complex influences about him that surrounded me, would have been so
nearly what I am that I should have loved him like a brother,--always
provided that I did not hate him for his resemblance to me, on the same
principle as that which makes bodies in the same electric condition repel
each other.

For, perhaps after all, my One Reader is quite as likely to be not the
person most resembling myself, but the one to whom my nature is
complementary.  Just as a particular soil wants some one element to
fertilize it, just as the body in some conditions has a kind of
famine--for one special food, so the mind has its wants, which do not
always call for what is best, but which know themselves and are as
peremptory as the salt-sick sailor's call for a lemon or a raw potato,
or, if you will, as those capricious "longings," which have a certain
meaning, we may suppose, and which at any rate we think it reasonable to
satisfy if we can.

I was going to say something about our boarders the other day when I got
run away with by my local reminiscences.  I wish you to understand that
we have a rather select company at the table of our boarding-house.

Our Landlady is a most respectable person, who has seen better days, of
course,--all landladies have,--but has also, I feel sure, seen a good
deal worse ones.  For she wears a very handsome silk dress on state
occasions, with a breastpin set, as I honestly believe, with genuine
pearls, and appears habitually with a very smart cap, from under which
her gray curls come out with an unmistakable expression, conveyed in the
hieratic language of the feminine priesthood, to the effect that while
there is life there is hope.  And when I come to reflect on the many
circumstances which go to the making of matrimonial happiness, I cannot
help thinking that a personage of her present able exterior, thoroughly
experienced in all the domestic arts which render life comfortable, might
make the later years of some hitherto companionless bachelor very
endurable, not to say pleasant.

The condition of the Landlady's family is, from what I learn, such as to
make the connection I have alluded to, I hope with delicacy, desirable
for incidental as well as direct reasons, provided a fitting match could
be found.  I was startled at hearing her address by the familiar name of
Benjamin the young physician I have referred to, until I found on
inquiry, what I might have guessed by the size of his slices of pie and
other little marks of favoritism, that he was her son.  He has recently
come back from Europe, where he has topped off his home training with a
first-class foreign finish.  As the Landlady could never have educated
him in this way out of the profits of keeping boarders, I was not
surprised when I was told that she had received a pretty little property
in the form of a bequest from a former boarder, a very kind-hearted,
worthy old gentleman who had been long with her and seen how hard she
worked for food and clothes for herself and this son of hers, Benjamin
Franklin by his baptismal name.  Her daughter had also married well, to a
member of what we may call the post-medical profession, that, namely,
which deals with the mortal frame after the practitioners of the healing
art have done with it and taken their leave.  So thriving had this
son-in-law of hers been in his business, that his wife drove about in her
own carriage, drawn by a pair of jet-black horses of most dignified
demeanor, whose only fault was a tendency to relapse at once into a walk
after every application of a stimulus that quickened their pace to a
trot; which application always caused them to look round upon the driver
with a surprised and offended air, as if he had been guilty of a grave
indecorum.

The Landlady's daughter had been blessed with a number of children, of
great sobriety of outward aspect, but remarkably cheerful in their inward
habit of mind, more especially on the occasion of the death of a doll,
which was an almost daily occurrence, and gave them immense delight in
getting up a funeral, for which they had a complete miniature outfit.
How happy they were under their solemn aspect! For the head mourner, a
child of remarkable gifts, could actually make the tears run down her
cheeks,--as real ones as if she had been a grown person following a rich
relative, who had not forgotten his connections, to his last unfurnished
lodgings.

So this was a most desirable family connection for the right man to step
into,--a thriving, thrifty  mother-in-law, who knew what was good for the
sustenance of the body, and had no doubt taught it to her daughter; a
medical artist at hand in case the luxuries of the table should happen to
disturb the physiological harmonies; and in the worst event, a sweet
consciousness that the last sad offices would be attended to with
affectionate zeal, and probably a large discount from the usual charges.

It seems as if I could hardly be at this table for a year, if I should
stay so long, without seeing some romance or other work itself out under
my eyes; and I cannot help thinking that the Landlady is to be the
heroine of the love-history like to unfold itself.  I think I see the
little cloud in the horizon, with a silvery lining to it, which may end
in a rain of cards tied round with white ribbons. Extremes meet, and who
so like to be the other party as the elderly gentleman at the other end
of the table, as far from her now as the length of the board permits?  I
may be mistaken, but I think this is to be the romantic episode of the
year before me.  Only it seems so natural it is improbable, for you never
find your dropped money just where you look for it, and so it is with
these a priori matches.

This gentleman is a tight, tidy, wiry little man, with a small, brisk
head, close-cropped white hair, a good wholesome complexion, a quiet,
rather kindly face, quick in his movements, neat in his dress, but fond
of wearing a short jacket over his coat, which gives him the look of a
pickled or preserved schoolboy.  He has retired, they say, from a
thriving business, with a snug property, suspected by some to be rather
more than snug, and entitling him to be called a capitalist, except that
this word seems to be equivalent to highway robber in the new gospel of
Saint Petroleum.  That he is economical in his habits cannot be denied,
for he saws and splits his own wood, for exercise, he says,--and makes
his own fires, brushes his own shoes, and, it is whispered, darns a hole
in a stocking now and then,--all for exercise, I suppose.  Every summer
he goes out of town for a few weeks.  On a given day of the month a wagon
stops at the door and takes up, not his trunks, for he does not indulge
in any such extravagance, but the stout brown linen bags in which he
packs the few conveniences he carries with him.

I do not think this worthy and economical personage will have much to do
or to say, unless he marries the Landlady.  If he does that, he will play
a part of some importance,--but I don't feel sure at all. His talk is
little in amount, and generally ends in some compact formula condensing
much wisdom in few words, as that a man, should not put all his eggs in
one basket; that there are as good fish in the sea as ever came out of
it; and one in particular, which he surprised me by saying in pretty good
French one day, to the effect that the inheritance of the world belongs
to the phlegmatic people, which seems to me to have a good deal of truth
in it.

The other elderly personage, the old man with iron-gray hair and large
round spectacles, sits at my right at table.  He is a retired college
officer, a man of books and observation, and himself an author.  Magister
Artium is one of his titles on the College Catalogue, and I like best to
speak of him as the Master, because he has a certain air of authority
which none of us feel inclined to dispute.  He has given me a copy of a
work of his which seems to me not wanting in suggestiveness, and which I
hope I shall be able to make some use of in my records by and by.  I said
the other day that he had good solid prejudices, which is true, and I
like him none the worse for it; but he has also opinions more or less
original, valuable, probable, fanciful; fantastic, or whimsical, perhaps,
now and then; which he promulgates at table somewhat in the tone of
imperial edicts.  Another thing I like about him is, that he takes a
certain intelligent interest in pretty much everything that interests
other people.  I asked him the other day what he thought most about in
his wide range of studies.

--Sir,--said he,--I take stock in everything that concerns anybody.
Humani nihil,--you know the rest.  But if you ask me what is my
specialty, I should say, I applied myself more particularly to the
contemplation of the Order of Things.

--A pretty wide subject,--I ventured to suggest.

--Not wide enough, sir,--not wide enough to satisfy the desire of a mind
which wants to get at absolute truth, without reference to the empirical
arrangements of our particular planet and its environments. I want to
subject the formal conditions of space and time to a new analysis, and
project a possible universe outside of the Order of Things.  But I have
narrowed myself by studying the actual facts of being.  By and by--by and
by--perhaps--perhaps.  I hope to do some sound thinking in heaven--if I
ever get there,--he said seriously, and it seemed to me not irreverently.

--I rather like that,--I said.  I think your telescopic people are, on
the whole, more satisfactory than your microscopic ones.

--My left-hand neighbor fidgeted about a little in his chair as I said
this.  But the young man sitting not far from the Landlady, to whom my
attention had been attracted by the expression of his eyes, which seemed
as if they saw nothing before him, but looked beyond everything, smiled a
sort of faint starlight smile, that touched me strangely; for until that
moment he had appeared as if his thoughts were far away, and I had been
questioning whether he had lost friends lately, or perhaps had never had
them, he seemed so remote from our boarding-house life.  I will inquire
about him, for he interests me, and I thought he seemed interested as I
went on talking.

--No,--I continued,--I don't want to have the territory of a man's mind
fenced in.  I don't want to shut out the mystery of the stars and the
awful hollow that holds them.  We have done with those hypaethral
temples, that were open above to the heavens, but we can have attics and
skylights to them.  Minds with skylights,--yes,--stop, let us see if we
can't get something out of that.

One-story intellects, two--story intellects, three story intellects with
skylights.  All fact--collectors, who have no aim beyond their facts, are
one-story men.  Two-story men compare, reason, generalize, using the
labors of the fact-collectors as well as their own.  Three-story men
idealize, imagine, predict; their best illumination comes from above,
through the skylight.  There are minds with large ground floors, that can
store an infinite amount of knowledge; some librarians, for instance, who
know enough of books to help other people, without being able to make
much other use of their knowledge, have intellects of this class.  Your
great working lawyer has two spacious stories; his mind is clear, because
his mental floors are large, and he has room to arrange his thoughts so
that he can get at them,--facts below, principles above, and all in
ordered series; poets are often narrow below, incapable of clear
statement, and with small power of consecutive reasoning, but full of
light, if sometimes rather bare of furniture, in the attics.

--The old Master smiled.  I think he suspects himself of a three-story
intellect, and I don't feel sure that he is n't right.

--Is it dark meat or white meat you will be helped to?--said the
Landlady, addressing the Master.

--Dark meat for me, always,--he answered.  Then turning to me, he began
one of those monologues of his, such as that which put the Member of the
Haouse asleep the other day.

--It 's pretty much the same in men and women and in books and
everything, that it is in turkeys and chickens.  Why, take your poets,
now, say Browning and Tennyson.  Don't you think you can say which is the
dark-meat and which is the white-meat poet?  And so of the people you
know; can't you pick out the full-flavored, coarse-fibred characters from
the delicate, fine-fibred ones?  And in the same person, don't you know
the same two shades in different parts of the character that you find in
the wing and thigh of a partridge?  I suppose you poets may like white
meat best, very probably; you had rather have a wing than a drumstick, I
dare say.

--Why, yes,--said I,--I suppose some of us do.  Perhaps it is because a
bird flies with his white-fleshed limbs and walks with the dark-fleshed
ones.  Besides, the wing-muscles are nearer the heart than the
leg-muscles.

I thought that sounded mighty pretty, and paused a moment to pat myself
on the back, as is my wont when I say something that I think of superior
quality.  So I lost my innings; for the Master is apt to strike in at the
end of a bar, instead of waiting for a rest, if I may borrow a musical
phrase.  No matter, just at this moment, what he said; but he talked the
Member of the Haouse asleep again.

They have a new term nowadays (I am speaking to you, the Reader) for
people that do a good deal of talking; they call them "conversationists,"
or "conversationalists "; talkists, I suppose, would do just as well.  It
is rather dangerous to get the name of being one of these phenomenal
manifestations, as one is expected to say something remarkable every time
one opens one's mouth in company. It seems hard not to be able to ask for
a piece of bread or a tumbler of water, without a sensation running round
the table, as if one were an electric eel or a torpedo, and couldn't be
touched without giving a shock.  A fellow is n't all battery, is he?  The
idea that a Gymnotus can't swallow his worm without a coruscation of
animal lightning is hard on that brilliant but sensational being.  Good
talk is not a matter of will at all; it depends--you know we are all
half-materialists nowadays--on a certain amount of active congestion of
the brain, and that comes when it is ready, and not before.  I saw a man
get up the other day in a pleasant company, and talk away for about five
minutes, evidently by a pure effort of will.  His person was good, his
voice was pleasant, but anybody could see that it was all mechanical
labor; he was sparring for wind, as the Hon. John Morrissey, M. C., would
express himself.  Presently,--

Do you,--Beloved, I am afraid you are not old enough,--but do you
remember the days of the tin tinder-box, the flint, and steel? Click!
click! click!--Al-h-h! knuckles that time! click! click! CLICK! a spark
has taken, and is eating into the black tinder, as a six-year-old eats
into a sheet of gingerbread.

Presently, after hammering away for his five minutes with mere words, the
spark of a happy expression took somewhere among the mental combustibles,
and then for ten minutes we had a pretty, wandering, scintillating play
of eloquent thought, that enlivened, if it did not kindle, all around it.
If you want the real philosophy of it, I will give it to you.  The chance
thought or expression struck the nervous centre of consciousness, as the
rowel of a spur stings the flank of a racer.  Away through all the
telegraphic radiations of the nervous cords flashed the intelligence that
the brain was kindling, and must be fed with something or other, or it
would burn itself to ashes.

And all the great hydraulic engines poured in their scarlet blood, and
the fire kindled, and the flame rose; for the blood is a stream that,
like burning rock-oil, at once kindles, and is itself the fuel. You can't
order these organic processes, any more than a milliner can make a rose.
She can make something that looks like a rose, more or less, but it takes
all the forces of the universe to finish and sweeten that blossom in your
button-hole; and you may be sure that when the orator's brain is in a
flame, when the poet's heart is in a tumult, it is something mightier
than he and his will that is dealing with him!  As I have looked from one
of the northern windows of the street which commands our noble
estuary,--the view through which is a picture on an illimitable canvas
and a poem in innumerable cantos,--I have sometimes seen a pleasure-boat
drifting along, her sail flapping, and she seeming as if she had neither
will nor aim.  At her stern a man was laboring to bring her head round
with an oar, to little purpose, as it seemed to those who watched him
pulling and tugging.  But all at once the wind of heaven, which had
wandered all the way from Florida or from Labrador, it may be, struck
full upon the sail, and it swelled and rounded itself, like a white bosom
that had burst its bodice, and--

--You are right; it is too true! but how I love these pretty phrases!  I
am afraid I am becoming an epicure in words, which is a bad thing to be,
unless it is dominated by something infinitely better than itself.  But
there is a fascination in the mere sound of articulated breath; of
consonants that resist with the firmness of a maid of honor, or half or
wholly yield to the wooing lips; of vowels that flow and murmur, each
after its kind; the peremptory b and p, the brittle k, the vibrating r,
the insinuating s, the feathery f, the velvety v, the bell-voiced m, the
tranquil broad a, the penetrating e, the cooing u, the emotional o, and
the beautiful combinations of alternate rock and stream, as it were, that
they give to the rippling flow of speech,--there is a fascination in the
skilful handling of these, which the great poets and even prose-writers
have not disdained to acknowledge and use to recommend their thought.
What do you say to this line of Homer as a piece of poetical full-band
music?  I know you read the Greek characters with perfect ease, but
permit me, just for my own satisfaction, to put it into English
letters:--

          Aigle pamphanoosa di' aitheros ouranon ike!

as if he should have spoken in our poorer phrase of

          Splendor far shining through ether to heaven ascending.

That Greek line, which I do not remember having heard mention of as
remarkable, has nearly every consonantal and vowel sound in the language.
Try it by the Greek and by the English alphabet; it is a curiosity.  Tell
me that old Homer did not roll his sightless eyeballs about with delight,
as he thundered out these ringing syllables!  It seems hard to think of
his going round like a hand-organ man, with such music and such thought
as his to earn his bread with.  One can't help wishing that Mr. Pugh
could have got at him for a single lecture, at least, of the "Star
Course," or that he could have appeared in the Music Hall, "for this
night only."

--I know I have rambled, but I hope you see that this is a delicate way
of letting you into the nature of the individual who is, officially, the
principal personage at our table.  It would hardly do to describe him
directly, you know.  But you must not think, because the lightning
zigzags, it does not know where to strike.

I shall try to go through the rest of my description of our boarders with
as little of digression as is consistent with my nature.  I think we have
a somewhat exceptional company.  Since our Landlady has got up in the
world, her board has been decidedly a favorite with persons a little
above the average in point of intelligence and education.  In fact, ever
since a boarder of hers, not wholly unknown to the reading public,
brought her establishment into notice, it has attracted a considerable
number of literary and scientific people, and now and then a politician,
like the Member of the House of Representatives, otherwise called the
Great and General Court of the State of Massachusetts.  The consequence
is, that there is more individuality of character than in a good many
similar boardinghouses, where all are business-men, engrossed in the same
pursuit of money-making, or all are engaged in politics, and so deeply
occupied with the welfare of the community that they can think and talk
of little else.

At my left hand sits as singular-looking a human being as I remember
seeing outside of a regular museum or tent-show.  His black coat shines
as if it had been polished; and it has been polished on the wearer's
back, no doubt, for the arms and other points of maximum attrition are
particularly smooth and bright.  Round shoulders,--stooping over some
minute labor, I suppose.  Very slender limbs, with bends like a
grasshopper's; sits a great deal, I presume; looks as if he might
straighten them out all of a sudden, and jump instead of walking.  Wears
goggles very commonly; says it rests his eyes, which he strains in
looking at very small objects.  Voice has a dry creak, as if made by some
small piece of mechanism that wanted oiling.  I don't think he is a
botanist, for he does not smell of dried herbs, but carries a camphorated
atmosphere about with him, as if to keep the moths from attacking him.  I
must find out what is his particular interest.  One ought to know
something about his immediate neighbors at the table.  This is what I
said to myself, before opening a conversation with him.  Everybody in our
ward of the city was in a great stir about a certain election, and I
thought I might as well begin with that as anything.

--How do you think the vote is likely to go tomorrow?--I said.

--It isn't to-morrow,--he answered,--it 's next month.

--Next month!--said I.---Why, what election do you mean?

--I mean the election to the Presidency of the Entomological Society,
sir,--he creaked, with an air of surprise, as if nobody could by any
possibility have been thinking of any other.  Great competition, sir,
between the dipterists and the lepidopterists as to which shall get in
their candidate.  Several close ballotings already; adjourned for a
fortnight.  Poor concerns, both of 'em.  Wait till our turn comes.

--I suppose you are an entomologist?--I said with a note of
interrogation.

-Not quite so ambitious as that, sir.  I should like to put my eyes on
the individual entitled to that name!  A society may call itself an
Entomological Society, but the man who arrogates such a broad title as
that to himself, in the present state of science, is a pretender, sir, a
dilettante, an impostor!  No man can be truly called an entomologist,
sir; the subject is too vast for any single human intelligence to grasp.

--May I venture to ask,--I said, a little awed by his statement and
manner,--what is your special province of study?

I am often spoken of as a Coleopterist,--he said,--but I have no right to
so comprehensive a name.  The genus Scarabaeus is what I have chiefly
confined myself to, and ought to have studied exclusively.  The beetles
proper are quite enough for the labor of one man's life.  Call me a
Scarabaeist if you will; if I can prove myself worthy of that name, my
highest ambition will be more than satisfied.

I think, by way of compromise and convenience, I shall call him the
Scarabee.  He has come to look wonderfully like those creatures,--the
beetles, I mean,---by being so much among them.  His room is hung round
with cases of them, each impaled on a pin driven through him, something
as they used to bury suicides.  These cases take the place for him of
pictures and all other ornaments.  That Boy steals into his room
sometimes, and stares at them with great admiration, and has himself
undertaken to form a rival cabinet, chiefly consisting of flies, so far,
arranged in ranks superintended by an occasional spider.

The old Master, who is a bachelor, has a kindly feeling for this little
monkey, and those of his kind.

--I like children,--he said to me one day at table,--I like 'em, and I
respect 'em.  Pretty much all the honest truth-telling there is in the
world is done by them.  Do you know they play the part in the household
which the king's jester, who very often had a mighty long head under his
cap and bells, used to play for a monarch?  There 's no radical club like
a nest of little folks in a nursery.  Did you ever watch a baby's
fingers?  I have, often enough, though I never knew what it was to own
one.---The Master paused half a minute or so,--sighed,--perhaps at
thinking what he had missed in life,--looked up at me a little vacantly.
I saw what was the matter; he had lost the thread of his talk.

--Baby's fingers,--I intercalated.

-Yes, yes; did you ever see how they will poke those wonderful little
fingers of theirs into every fold and crack and crevice they can get at?
That is their first education, feeling their way into the solid facts of
the material world.  When they begin to talk it is the same thing over
again in another shape.  If there is a crack or a flaw in your answer to
their confounded shoulder-hitting questions, they will poke and poke
until they have got it gaping just as the baby's fingers have made a rent
out of that atom of a hole in his pinafore that your old eyes never took
notice of.  Then they make such fools of us by copying on a small scale
what we do in the grand manner.  I wonder if it ever occurs to our
dried-up neighbor there to ask himself whether That Boy's collection of
flies is n't about as significant in the Order of Things as his own
Museum of Beetles?

--I couldn't help thinking that perhaps That Boy's questions about the
simpler mysteries of life might have a good deal of the same kind of
significance as the Master's inquiries into the Order of Things.

--On my left, beyond my next neighbor the Scarabee, at the end of the
table, sits a person of whom we know little, except that he carries about
him more palpable reminiscences of tobacco and the allied sources of
comfort than a very sensitive organization might find acceptable.  The
Master does not seem to like him much, for some reason or other,--perhaps
he has a special aversion to the odor of tobacco.  As his forefinger
shows a little too distinctly that he uses a pen, I shall compliment him
by calling him the Man of Letters, until I find out more about him.

--The Young Girl who sits on my right, next beyond the Master, can hardly
be more than nineteen or twenty years old.  I wish I could paint her so
as to interest others as much as she does me.  But she has not a
profusion of sunny tresses wreathing a neck of alabaster, and a cheek
where the rose and the lily are trying to settle their old quarrel with
alternating victory.  Her hair is brown, her cheek is delicately pallid,
her forehead is too ample for a ball-room beauty's.  A single faint line
between the eyebrows is the record of long--continued anxious efforts to
please in the task she has chosen, or rather which has been forced upon
her.  It is the same line of anxious and conscientious effort which I saw
not long since on the forehead of one of the sweetest and truest singers
who has visited us; the same which is so striking on the masks of singing
women painted upon the facade of our Great Organ,--that Himalayan home of
harmony which you are to see and then die, if you don't live where you
can see and hear it often.  Many deaths have happened in a neighboring
large city from that well-known complaint, Icterus Invidiosorum, after
returning from a visit to the Music Hall.  The invariable symptom of a
fatal attack is the Risus Sardonicus.--But the Young Girl.  She gets her
living by writing stories for a newspaper.  Every week she furnishes a
new story.  If her head aches or her heart is heavy, so that she does not
come to time with her story, she falls behindhand and has to live on
credit.  It sounds well enough to say that "she supports herself by her
pen," but her lot is a trying one; it repeats the doom of the Danaides.
The "Weekly Bucket" has no bottom, and it is her business to help fill
it.  Imagine for one moment what it is to tell a tale that must flow on,
flow ever, without pausing; the lover miserable and happy this week, to
begin miserable again next week and end as before; the villain scowling,
plotting, punished; to scowl, plot, and get punished again in our next;
an endless series of woes and busses, into each paragraph of which the
forlorn artist has to throw all the liveliness, all the emotion, all the
graces of style she is mistress of, for the wages of a maid of all work,
and no more recognition or thanks from anybody than the apprentice who
sets the types for the paper that prints her ever-ending and
ever-beginning stories.  And yet she has a pretty talent, sensibility, a
natural way of writing, an ear for the music of verse, in which she
sometimes indulges to vary the dead monotony of everlasting narrative,
and a sufficient amount of invention to make her stories readable.  I
have found my eyes dimmed over them oftener than once, more with thinking
about her, perhaps, than about her heroes and heroines.  Poor little
body! Poor little mind!  Poor little soul!  She is one of that great
company of delicate, intelligent, emotional young creatures, who are
waiting, like that sail I spoke of, for some breath of heaven to fill
their white bosoms,--love, the right of every woman; religious emotion,
sister of love, with the same passionate eyes, but cold, thin, bloodless
hands,--some enthusiasm of humanity or divinity; and find that life
offers them, instead, a seat on a wooden bench, a chain to fasten them to
it, and a heavy oar to pull day and night. We read the Arabian tales and
pity the doomed lady who must amuse her lord and master from day to day
or have her head cut off; how much better is a mouth without bread to
fill it than no mouth at all to fill, because no head?  We have all round
us a weary-eyed company of Scheherezades!  This is one of them, and I may
call her by that name when it pleases me to do so.

The next boarder I have to mention is the one who sits between the Young
Girl and the Landlady.  In a little chamber into which a small thread of
sunshine finds its way for half an hour or so every day during a month or
six weeks of the spring or autumn, at all other times obliged to content
itself with ungilded daylight, lives this boarder, whom, without wronging
any others of our company, I may call, as she is very generally called in
the household, The Lady.  In giving her this name it is not meant that
there are no other ladies at our table, or that the handmaids who serve
us are not ladies, or to deny the general proposition that everybody who
wears the unbifurcated garment is entitled to that appellation.  Only
this lady has a look and manner which there is no mistaking as belonging
to a person always accustomed to refined and elegant society.  Her style
is perhaps a little more courtly and gracious than some would like. The
language and manner which betray the habitual desire of pleasing, and
which add a charm to intercourse in the higher social circles, are liable
to be construed by sensitive beings unused to such amenities as an odious
condescension when addressed to persons of less consideration than the
accused, and as a still more odious--you know the word--when directed to
those who are esteemed by the world as considerable person ages.  But of
all this the accused are fortunately wholly unconscious, for there is
nothing so entirely natural and unaffected as the highest breeding.

From an aspect of dignified but undisguised economy which showed itself
in her dress as well as in her limited quarters, I suspected a story of
shipwrecked fortune, and determined to question our Landlady.  That
worthy woman was delighted to tell the history of her most distinguished
boarder.  She was, as I had supposed, a gentlewoman whom a change of
circumstances had brought down from her high estate.

--Did I know the Goldenrod family?--Of course I did.---Well, the Lady,
was first cousin to Mrs. Midas Goldenrod.  She had been here in her
carriage to call upon her,--not very often.---Were her rich relations
kind and helpful to her?--Well, yes; at least they made her presents now
and then.  Three or four years ago they sent her a silver waiter, and
every Christmas they sent her a boquet,--it must cost as much as five
dollars, the Landlady thought.

--And how did the Lady receive these valuable and useful gifts?

--Every Christmas she got out the silver waiter and borrowed a glass
tumbler and filled it with water, and put the boquet in it and set it on
the waiter.  It smelt sweet enough and looked pretty for a day or two,
but the Landlady thought it wouldn't have hurt 'em if they'd sent a piece
of goods for a dress, or at least a pocket-handkercher or two, or
something or other that she could 'a' made some kind of use of; but
beggars must n't be choosers; not that she was a beggar, for she'd sooner
die than do that if she was in want of a meal of victuals.  There was a
lady I remember, and she had a little boy and she was a widow, and after
she'd buried her husband she was dreadful poor, and she was ashamed to
let her little boy go out in his old shoes, and copper-toed shoes they
was too, because his poor little ten--toes--was a coming out of 'em; and
what do you think my husband's rich uncle,--well, there now, it was me
and my little Benjamin, as he was then, there's no use in hiding of
it,--and what do you think my husband's uncle sent me but a plaster of
Paris image of a young woman, that was,--well, her appearance wasn't
respectable, and I had to take and wrap her up in a towel and poke her
right into my closet, and there she stayed till she got her head broke
and served her right, for she was n't fit to show folks.  You need n't
say anything about what I told you, but the fact is I was desperate poor
before I began to support myself taking boarders, and a lone woman
without her--her--

The sentence plunged into the gulf of her great remembered sorrow, and
was lost to the records of humanity.

--Presently she continued in answer to my questions: The Lady was not
very sociable; kept mostly to herself.  The Young Girl (our Scheherezade)
used to visit her sometimes, and they seemed to like each other, but the
Young Girl had not many spare hours for visiting. The Lady never found
fault, but she was very nice in her tastes, and kept everything about her
looking as neat and pleasant as she could.

---What did she do?--Why, she read, and she drew pictures, and she did
needlework patterns, and played on an old harp she had; the gilt was
mostly off, but it sounded very sweet, and she sung to it sometimes,
those old songs that used to be in fashion twenty or thirty years ago,
with words to 'em that folks could understand.

Did she do anything to help support herself?--The Landlady couldn't say
she did, but she thought there was rich people enough that ought to buy
the flowers and things she worked and painted.

All this points to the fact that she was bred to be an ornamental rather
than what is called a useful member of society.  This is all very well so
long as fortune favors those who are chosen to be the ornamental
personages; but if the golden tide recedes and leaves them stranded, they
are more to be pitied than almost any other class.  "I cannot dig, to beg
I am ashamed."

I think it is unpopular in this country to talk much about gentlemen and
gentlewomen.  People are touchy about social distinctions, which no doubt
are often invidious and quite arbitrary and accidental, but which it is
impossible to avoid recognizing as facts of natural history.  Society
stratifies itself everywhere, and the stratum which is generally
recognized as the uppermost will be apt to have the advantage in easy
grace of manner and in unassuming confidence, and consequently be more
agreeable in the superficial relations of life. To compare these
advantages with the virtues and utilities would be foolish.  Much of the
noblest work in life is done by ill-dressed, awkward, ungainly persons;
but that is no more reason for undervaluing good manners and what we call
high-breeding, than the fact that the best part of the sturdy labor of
the world is done by men with exceptionable hands is to be urged against
the use of Brown Windsor as a preliminary to appearance in cultivated
society.

I mean to stand up for this poor lady, whose usefulness in the world is
apparently problematical.  She seems to me like a picture which has
fallen from its gilded frame and lies, face downward, on the dusty floor.
The picture never was as needful as a window or a door, but it was
pleasant to see it in its place, and it would be pleasant to see it there
again, and I, for one, should be thankful to have the Lady restored by
some turn of fortune to the position from which she has been so cruelly
cast down.

--I have asked the Landlady about the young man sitting near her, the
same who attracted my attention the other day while I was talking, as I
mentioned.  He passes most of his time in a private observatory, it
appears; a watcher of the stars.  That I suppose gives the peculiar look
to his lustrous eyes.  The Master knows him and was pleased to tell me
something about him.

You call yourself a Poet,--he said,--and we call you so, too, and so you
are; I read your verses and like 'em.  But that young man lives in a
world beyond the imagination of poets, let me tell you.  The daily home
of his thought is in illimitable space, hovering between the two
eternities.  In his contemplations the divisions of time run together, as
in the thought of his Maker.  With him also,--I say it not
profanely,--one day is as a thousand years and a thousand years as one
day.

This account of his occupation increased the interest his look had
excited in me, and I have observed him more particularly and found out
more about him.  Sometimes, after a long night's watching, he looks so
pale and worn, that one would think the cold moonlight had stricken him
with some malign effluence such as it is fabled to send upon those who
sleep in it.  At such times he seems more like one who has come from a
planet farther away from the sun than our earth, than like one of us
terrestrial creatures.  His home is truly in the heavens, and he
practises an asceticism in the cause of science almost comparable to that
of Saint Simeon Stylites.  Yet they tell me he might live in luxury if he
spent on himself what he spends on science.  His knowledge is of that
strange, remote character, that it seems sometimes almost superhuman.  He
knows the ridges and chasms of the moon as a surveyor knows a garden-plot
he has measured.  He watches the snows that gather around the poles of
Mars; he is on the lookout for the expected comet at the moment when its
faint stain of diffused light first shows itself; he analyzes the ray
that comes from the sun's photosphere; he measures the rings of Saturn;
he counts his asteroids to see that none are missing, as the shepherd
counts the sheep in his flock.  A strange unearthly being; lonely,
dwelling far apart from the thoughts and cares of the planet on which he
lives,--an enthusiast who gives his life to knowledge; a student of
antiquity, to whom the records of the geologist are modern pages in the
great volume of being, and the pyramids a memorandum of yesterday, as the
eclipse or occultation that is to take place thousands of years hence is
an event of to-morrow in the diary without beginning and without end
where he enters the aspect of the passing moment as it is read on the
celestial dial.

In very marked contrast with this young man is the something more than
middle-aged Register of Deeds, a rusty, sallow, smoke-dried looking
personage, who belongs to this earth as exclusively as the other belongs
to the firmament.  His movements are as mechanical as those of a
pendulum,--to the office, where he changes his coat and plunges into
messuages and building-lots; then, after changing his coat again, back to
our table, and so, day by day, the dust of years gradually gathering
around him as it does on the old folios that fill the shelves all round
the great cemetery of past transactions of which he is the sexton.

Of the Salesman who sits next him, nothing need be said except that he is
good-looking, rosy, well-dressed, and of very polite manners, only a
little more brisk than the approved style of carriage permits, as one in
the habit of springing with a certain alacrity at the call of a customer.

You would like to see, I don't doubt, how we sit at the table, and I will
help you by means of a diagram which shows the present arrangement of our
seats.

                 4     3     2     1     14    13
              ----------------------------------
               | O     O     O     O     O     O |
               |                                 |
             5 | O       Breakfast-Table       O |12
               |                                 |
               | O     O     O     O     O     O |
              ----------------------------------
                 6     7     8     9     10    11

          1.  The Poet.
          2.  The Master Of Arts.
          3.  The Young Girl (Scheherezade).
          4.  The Lady.
          5.  The Landlady.
          6.  Dr. B. Franklin.
          7.  That Boy.
          8.  The Astronomer.
          9.  The Member of the Haouse.
         10.  The Register of Deeds.
         11.  The Salesman.
         12.  The Capitalist.
         13.  The Man of Letters(?).
         14.  The Scarabee.

Our young Scheherezade varies her prose stories now and then, as I told
you, with compositions in verse, one or two of which she has let me look
over.  Here is one of them, which she allowed me to copy.  It is from a
story of hers, "The Sun-Worshipper's Daughter," which you may find in the
periodical before mentioned, to which she is a contributor, if your can
lay your hand upon a file of it.  I think our Scheherezade has never had
a lover in human shape, or she would not play so lightly with the
firebrands of the great passion.

               FANTASIA.

     Kiss mine eyelids, beauteous Morn,
     Blushing into life new-born!
     Lend me violets for my hair,
     And thy russet robe to wear,
     And thy ring of rosiest hue
     Set in drops of diamond dew!

     Kiss my cheek, thou noontide ray,
     From my Love so far away!
     Let thy splendor streaming down
     Turn its pallid lilies brown,
     Till its darkening shades reveal
     Where his passion pressed its seal!

     Kiss my lips, thou Lord of light,
     Kiss my lips a soft good night!
     Westward sinks thy golden car;
     Leave me but the evening star,
     And my solace that shall be,
     Borrowing all its light from thee!




III

The old Master was talking about a concert he had been to hear.--I don't
like your chopped music anyway.  That woman--she had more sense in her
little finger than forty medical societies--Florence Nightingale--says
that the music you pour out is good for sick folks, and the music you
pound out isn't.  Not that exactly, but something like it.  I have been
to hear some music-pounding.  It was a young woman, with as many white
muslin flounces round her as the planet Saturn has rings, that did it.
She--gave the music-stool a twirl or two and fluffed down on to it like a
whirl of soap-suds in a hand-basin.  Then she pushed up her cuffs as if
she was going to fight for the champion's belt.  Then she worked her
wrists and her hands, to limber 'em, I suppose, and spread out her
fingers till they looked as though they would pretty much cover the
key-board, from the growling end to the little squeaky one.  Then those
two hands of hers made a jump at the keys as if they were a couple of
tigers coming down on a flock of black and white sheep, and the piano
gave a great howl as if its tail had been trod on.  Dead stop,--so still
you could hear your hair growing.  Then another jump, and another howl,
as if the piano had two tails and you had trod on both of 'em at once,
and, then a grand clatter and scramble and string of jumps, up and down,
back and forward, one hand over the other, like a stampede of rats and
mice more than like anything I call music.  I like to hear a woman sing,
and I like to hear a fiddle sing, but these noises they hammer out of
their wood and ivory anvils--don't talk to me, I know the difference
between a bullfrog and a woodthrush and--

Pop! went a small piece of artillery such as is made of a stick of elder
and carries a pellet of very moderate consistency.  That Boy was in his
seat and looking demure enough, but there could be no question that he
was the artillery-man who had discharged the missile.  The aim was not a
bad one, for it took the Master full in the forehead, and had the effect
of checking the flow of his eloquence.  How the little monkey had learned
to time his interruptions I do not know, but I have observed more than
once before this, that the popgun would go off just at the moment when
some one of the company was getting too energetic or prolix.  The Boy
isn't old enough to judge for himself when to intervene to change the
order of conversation; no, of course he isn't.  Somebody must give him a
hint.  Somebody.--Who is it?  I suspect Dr. B. Franklin.  He looks too
knowing.  There is certainly a trick somewhere.  Why, a day or two ago I
was myself discoursing, with considerable effect, as I thought, on some
of the new aspects of humanity, when I was struck full on the cheek by
one of these little pellets, and there was such a confounded laugh that I
had to wind up and leave off with a preposition instead of a good
mouthful of polysyllables.  I have watched our young Doctor, however, and
have been entirely unable to detect any signs of communication between
him and this audacious child, who is like to become a power among us, for
that popgun is fatal to any talker who is hit by its pellet.  I have
suspected a foot under the table as the prompter, but I have been unable
to detect the slightest movement or look as if he were making one, on the
part of Dr. Benjamin Franklin.  I cannot help thinking of the flappers in
Swift's Laputa, only they gave one a hint when to speak and another a
hint to listen, whereas the popgun says unmistakably, "Shut up!"

--I should be sorry to lose my confidence in Dr. B. Franklin, who seems
very much devoted to his business, and whom I mean to consult about some
small symptoms I have had lately.  Perhaps it is coming to a new
boarding-house.  The young people who come into Paris from the provinces
are very apt--so I have been told by one that knows--to have an attack of
typhoid fever a few weeks or months after their arrival.  I have not been
long enough at this table to get well acclimated; perhaps that is it.
Boarding-House Fever.  Something like horse-ail, very likely,--horses get
it, you know, when they are brought to city stables.  A little "off my
feed," as Hiram Woodruff would say.  A queer discoloration about my
forehead.  Query, a bump? Cannot remember any.  Might have got it against
bedpost or something while asleep.  Very unpleasant to look so.  I wonder
how my portrait would look, if anybody should take it now!  I hope not
quite so badly as one I saw the other day, which I took for the end man
of the Ethiopian Serenaders, or some traveller who had been exploring the
sources of the Niger, until I read the name at the bottom and found it
was a face I knew as well as my own.

I must consult somebody, and it is nothing more than fair to give our
young Doctor a chance.  Here goes for Dr. Benjamin Franklin.

The young Doctor has a very small office and a very large sign, with a
transparency at night big enough for an oyster-shop.  These young doctors
are particularly strong, as I understand, on what they call
diagnosis,--an excellent branch of the healing art, full of satisfaction
to the curious practitioner, who likes to give the right Latin name to
one's complaint; not quite so satisfactory to the patient, as it is not
so very much pleasanter to be bitten by a dog with a collar round his
neck telling you that he is called Snap or Teaser, than by a dog without
a collar.  Sometimes, in fact, one would a little rather not know the
exact name of his complaint, as if he does he is pretty sure to look it
out in a medical dictionary, and then if he reads, This terrible disease
is attended with vast suffering and is inevitably mortal, or any such
statement, it is apt to affect him unpleasantly.

I confess to a little shakiness when I knocked at Dr. Benjamin's office
door.  "Come in!" exclaimed Dr. B. F. in tones that sounded ominous and
sepulchral.  And I went in.

I don't believe the chambers of the Inquisition ever presented a more
alarming array of implements for extracting a confession, than our young
Doctor's office did of instruments to make nature tell what was the
matter with a poor body.

There were Ophthalmoscopes and Rhinoscopes and Otoscopes and
Laryngoscopes and Stethoscopes; and Thermometers and Spirometers and
Dynamometers and Sphygmometers and Pleximeters; and Probes and Probangs
and all sorts of frightful inquisitive exploring contrivances; and scales
to weigh you in, and tests and balances and pumps and electro-magnets and
magneto-electric machines; in short, apparatus for doing everything but
turn you inside out.

Dr. Benjamin set me down before his one window and began looking at me
with such a superhuman air of sagacity, that I felt like one of those
open-breasted clocks which make no secret of their inside arrangements,
and almost thought he could see through me as one sees through a shrimp
or a jelly-fish.  First he looked at the place inculpated, which had a
sort of greenish-brown color, with his naked eyes, with much corrugation
of forehead and fearful concentration of attention; then through a
pocket-glass which he carried.  Then he drew back a space, for a
perspective view.  Then he made me put out my tongue and laid a slip of
blue paper on it, which turned red and scared me a little.  Next he took
my wrist; but instead of counting my pulse in the old-fashioned way, he
fastened a machine to it that marked all the beats on a sheet of
paper,--for all the world like a scale of the heights of mountains, say
from Mount Tom up to Chimborazo and then down again, and up again, and so
on.  In the mean time he asked me all sorts of questions about myself and
all my relatives, whether we had been subject to this and that malady,
until I felt as if we must some of us have had more or less of them, and
could not feel quite sure whether Elephantiasis and Beriberi and
Progressive Locomotor Ataxy did not run in the family.

After all this overhauling of myself and my history, he paused and looked
puzzled.  Something was suggested about what he called an "exploratory
puncture."  This I at once declined, with thanks. Suddenly a thought
struck him.  He looked still more closely at the discoloration I have
spoken of.

--Looks like--I declare it reminds me of--very rare! very curious! It
would be strange if my first case--of this kind--should be one of our
boarders!

What kind of a case do you call it?--I said, with a sort of feeling that
he could inflict a severe or a light malady on me, as if he were a judge
passing sentence.

--The color reminds me,--said Dr. B. Franklin,--of what I have seen in a
case of Addison's Disease, Morbus Addisonii.

--But my habits are quite regular,--I said; for I remembered that the
distinguished essayist was too fond of his brandy and water, and I
confess that the thought was not pleasant to me of following Dr.
Johnson's advice, with the slight variation of giving my days and my
nights to trying on the favorite maladies of Addison.

--Temperance people are subject to it!--exclaimed Dr. Benjamin, almost
exultingly, I thought.

--But I had the impression that the author of the Spectator was afflicted
with a dropsy, or some such inflated malady, to which persons of
sedentary and bibacious habits are liable.  [A literary swell,--I thought
to myself, but I did not say it.  I felt too serious.]

--The author of the Spectator!--cried out Dr. Benjamin,--I mean the
celebrated Dr. Addison, inventor, I would say discoverer, of the
wonderful new disease called after him.

---And what may this valuable invention or discovery consist in?--I
asked, for I was curious to know the nature of the gift which this
benefactor of the race had bestowed upon us.

--A most interesting affection, and rare, too.  Allow me to look closely
at that discoloration once more for a moment.  Cutis cenea, bronze skin,
they call it sometimes--extraordinary pigmentation--a little more to the
light, if you please--ah! now I get the bronze coloring admirably,
beautifully!  Would you have any objection to showing your case to the
Societies of Medical Improvement and Medical Observation?

[--My case!  O dear!] May I ask if any vital organ is commonly involved
in this interesting complaint?--I said, faintly.

--Well, sir,--the young Doctor replied,--there is an organ which is
--sometimes--a little touched, I may say; a very curious and ingenious
little organ or pair of organs.  Did you ever hear of the Capsulae,
Suprarenales?

--No,--said I,--is it a mortal complaint?--I ought to have known better
than to ask such a question, but I was getting nervous and thinking about
all sorts of horrid maladies people are liable to, with horrid names to
match.

--It is n't a complaint,--I mean they are not a complaint,--they are two
small organs, as I said, inside of you, and nobody knows what is the use
of them.  The most curious thing is that when anything is the matter with
them you turn of the color of bronze.  After all, I didn't mean to say I
believed it was Morbus Addisonii; I only thought of that when I saw the
discoloration.

So he gave me a recipe, which I took care to put where it could do no
hurt to anybody, and I paid him his fee (which he took with the air of a
man in the receipt of a great income) and said Good-morning.

--What in the name of a thousand diablos is the reason these confounded
doctors will mention their guesses about "a case," as they call it, and
all its conceivable possibilities, out loud before their patients?  I
don't suppose there is anything in all this nonsense about "Addison's
Disease," but I wish he hadn't spoken of that very interesting ailment,
and I should feel a little easier if that discoloration would leave my
forehead.  I will ask the Landlady about it,--these old women often know
more than the young doctors just come home with long names for everything
they don't know how to cure.  But the name of this complaint sets me
thinking.  Bronzed skin!  What an odd idea!  Wonder if it spreads all
over one.  That would be picturesque and pleasant, now, wouldn't it?  To
be made a living statue of,--nothing to do but strike an attitude.  Arm
up--so--like the one in the Garden.  John of Bologna's Mercury--thus on
one foot. Needy knife-grinder in the Tribune at Florence.  No, not
"needy," come to think of it.  Marcus Aurelius on horseback.  Query.  Are
horses subject to the Morbus Addisonii?  Advertise for a bronzed living
horse--Lyceum invitations and engagements--bronze versus brass.---What 's
the use in being frightened?  Bet it was a bump. Pretty certain I bumped
my forehead against something.  Never heard of a bronzed man before.
Have seen white men, black men, red men, yellow men, two or three blue
men, stained with doctor's stuff; some green ones, from the country; but
never a bronzed man.  Poh, poh! Sure it was a bump.  Ask Landlady to look
at it.

--Landlady did look at it.  Said it was a bump, and no mistake.
Recommended a piece of brown paper dipped in vinegar.  Made the house
smell as if it were in quarantine for the plague from Smyrna, but
discoloration soon disappeared,--so I did not become a bronzed man after
all,--hope I never shall while I am alive.  Should n't mind being done in
bronze after I was dead.  On second thoughts not so clear about it,
remembering how some of them look that we have got stuck up in public;
think I had rather go down to posterity in an Ethiopian Minstrel
portrait, like our friend's the other day.

--You were kind enough to say, I remarked to the Master, that you read my
poems and liked them.  Perhaps you would be good enough to tell me what
it is you like about them?

The Master harpooned a breakfast-roll and held it up before me.--Will you
tell me,--he said,--why you like that breakfast-roll?--I suppose he
thought that would stop my mouth in two senses.  But he was mistaken.

--To be sure I will,--said I.---First, I like its mechanical consistency;
brittle externally,--that is for the teeth, which want resistance to be
overcome; soft, spongy, well tempered and flavored internally, that is
for the organ of taste; wholesome, nutritious,--that is for the internal
surfaces and the system generally.

--Good,--said the Master, and laughed a hearty terrestrial laugh.

I hope he will carry that faculty of an honest laugh with him wherever he
goes,--why shouldn't he?  The "order of things," as he calls it, from
which hilarity was excluded, would be crippled and one-sided enough.  I
don't believe the human gamut will be cheated of a single note after men
have done breathing this fatal atmospheric mixture and die into the ether
of immortality!

I did n't say all that; if I had said it, it would have brought a pellet
from the popgun, I feel quite certain.

The Master went on after he had had out his laugh.--There is one thing I
am His Imperial Majesty about, and that is my likes and dislikes.  What
if I do like your verses,--you can't help yourself. I don't doubt
somebody or other hates 'em and hates you and everything you do, or ever
did, or ever can do.  He is all right; there is nothing you or I like
that somebody does n't hate.  Was there ever anything wholesome that was
not poison to somebody?  If you hate honey or cheese, or the products of
the dairy,--I know a family a good many of whose members can't touch
milk, butter, cheese, and the like, why, say so, but don't find fault
with the bees and the cows.  Some are afraid of roses, and I have known
those who thought a pond-lily a disagreeable neighbor.  That Boy will
give you the metaphysics of likes and dislikes.  Look here,--you young
philosopher over there,--do you like candy?

That Boy.---You bet!  Give me a stick and see if I don't.

And can you tell me why you like candy?

That Boy.--Because I do.

--There, now, that is the whole matter in a nutshell.  Why do your teeth
like crackling crust, and your organs of taste like spongy crumb, and
your digestive contrivances take kindly to bread rather than toadstools--

That Boy (thinking he was still being catechised).--Because they do.

Whereupon the Landlady said, Sh! and the Young Girl laughed, and the Lady
smiled; and Dr. Ben Franklin kicked him, moderately, under the table, and
the Astronomer looked up at the ceiling to see what had happened, and the
Member of the Haouse cried, Order!  Order! and the Salesman said, Shut
up, cash-boy! and the rest of the boarders kept on feeding; except the
Master, who looked very hard but half approvingly at the small intruder,
who had come about as nearly right as most professors would have done.

--You poets,--the Master said after this excitement had calmed down,
--you poets have one thing about you that is odd.  You talk about
everything as if you knew more about it than the people whose business it
is to know all about it.  I suppose you do a little of what we teachers
used to call "cramming" now and then?

--If you like your breakfast you must n't ask the cook too many
questions,--I answered.

--Oh, come now, don't be afraid of letting out your secrets.  I have a
notion I can tell a poet that gets himself up just as I can tell a
make-believe old man on the stage by the line where the gray skullcap
joins the smooth forehead of the young fellow of seventy.  You'll confess
to a rhyming dictionary anyhow, won't you?

--I would as lief use that as any other dictionary, but I don't want it.
When a word comes up fit to end a line with I can feel all the rhymes in
the language that are fit to go with it without naming them.  I have
tried them all so many times, I know all the polygamous words and all the
monogamous ones, and all the unmarrying ones,--the whole lot that have no
mates,--as soon as I hear their names called. Sometimes I run over a
string of rhymes, but generally speaking it is strange what a short list
it is of those that are good for anything. That is the pitiful side of
all rhymed verse.  Take two such words as home and world.  What can you
do with chrome or loam or gnome or tome?  You have dome, foam, and roam,
and not much more to use in your pome, as some of our fellow-countrymen
call it.  As for world, you know that in all human probability somebody
or something will be hurled into it or out of it; its clouds may be
furled or its grass impearled; possibly something may be whirled, or
curled, or have swirled, one of Leigh Hunt's words, which with lush, one
of Keats's, is an important part of the stock in trade of some dealers in
rhyme.

--And how much do you versifiers know of all those arts and sciences you
refer to as if you were as familiar with them as a cobbler is with his
wax and lapstone?

--Enough not to make too many mistakes.  The best way is to ask some
expert before one risks himself very far in illustrations from a branch
he does not know much about.  Suppose, for instance, I wanted to use the
double star to illustrate anything, say the relation of two human souls
to each other, what would I--do?  Why, I would ask our young friend there
to let me look at one of those loving celestial pairs through his
telescope, and I don't doubt he'd let me do so, and tell me their names
and all I wanted to know about them.

--I should be most happy to show any of the double stars or whatever else
there might be to see in the heavens to any of our friends at this
table,--the young man said, so cordially and kindly that it was a real
invitation.

--Show us the man in the moon,--said That Boy.---I should so like to see
a double star!--said Scheherezade, with a very pretty air of smiling
modesty.

--Will you go, if we make up a party?--I asked the Master.

--A cold in the head lasts me from three to five days,--answered the
Master.--I am not so very fond of being out in the dew like
Nebuchadnezzar: that will do for you young folks.

--I suppose I must be one of the young folks, not so young as our
Scheherezade, nor so old as the Capitalist,--young enough at any rate to
want to be of the party.  So we agreed that on some fair night when the
Astronomer should tell us that there was to be a fine show in the skies,
we would make up a party and go to the Observatory.  I asked the Scarabee
whether he would not like to make one of us.

--Out of the question, sir, out of the question.  I am altogether too
much occupied with an important scientific investigation to devote any
considerable part of an evening to star-gazing.

--Oh, indeed,--said I,--and may I venture to ask on what particular point
you are engaged just at present?

-Certainly, sir, you may.  It is, I suppose, as difficult and important a
matter to be investigated as often comes before a student of natural
history.  I wish to settle the point once for all whether the Pediculus
Mellitae is or is not the larva of Meloe.

[--Now is n't this the drollest world to live in that one could imagine,
short of being in a fit of delirium tremens?  Here is a fellow-creature
of mine and yours who is asked to see all the glories of the firmament
brought close to him, and he is too busy with a little unmentionable
parasite that infests the bristly surface of a bee to spare an hour or
two of a single evening for the splendors of the universe!  I must get a
peep through that microscope of his and see the pediculus which occupies
a larger space in his mental vision than the midnight march of the solar
systems.---The creature, the human one, I mean, interests me.]

--I am very curious,--I said,--about that pediculus melittae,--(just as
if I knew a good deal about the little wretch and wanted to know more,
whereas I had never heard him spoken of before, to my knowledge,)--could
you let me have a sight of him in your microscope?

--You ought to have seen the way in which the poor dried-up little
Scarabee turned towards me.  His eyes took on a really human look, and I
almost thought those antennae-like arms of his would have stretched
themselves out and embraced me.  I don't believe any of the boarders had
ever shown any interest in--him, except the little monkey of a Boy, since
he had been in the house.  It is not strange; he had not seemed to me
much like a human being, until all at once I touched the one point where
his vitality had concentrated itself, and he stood revealed a man and a
brother.

--Come in,--said he,--come in, right after breakfast, and you shall see
the animal that has convulsed the entomological world with questions as
to his nature and origin.

--So I went into the Scarabee's parlor, lodging-room, study, laboratory,
and museum,--a--single apartment applied to these various uses, you
understand.

--I wish I had time to have you show me all your treasures,--I said,
--but I am afraid I shall hardly be able to do more than look at the
bee-parasite.  But what a superb butterfly you have in that case!

--Oh, yes, yes, well enough,--came from South America with the beetle
there; look at him!  These Lepidoptera are for children to play with,
pretty to look at, so some think.  Give me the Coleoptera, and the kings
of the Coleoptera are the beetles!  Lepidoptera and Neuroptera for little
folks; Coleopteras for men, sir!

--The particular beetle he showed me in the case with the magnificent
butterfly was an odious black wretch that one would say, Ugh! at, and
kick out of his path, if he did not serve him worse than that.  But he
looked at it as a coin-collector would look at a Pescennius Niger, if the
coins of that Emperor are as scarce as they used to be when I was
collecting half-penny tokens and pine-tree shillings and battered bits of
Roman brass with the head of Gallienus or some such old fellow on them.

--A beauty!--he exclaimed,--and the only specimen of the kind in this
country, to the best of my belief.  A unique, sir, and there is a
pleasure in exclusive possession.  Not another beetle like that short of
South America, sir.

--I was glad to hear that there were no more like it in this
neighborhood, the present supply of cockroaches answering every purpose,
so far as I am concerned, that such an animal as this would be likely to
serve.

--Here are my bee-parasites,--said the Scarabee, showing me a box full of
glass slides, each with a specimen ready mounted for the microscope.  I
was most struck with one little beast flattened out like a turtle,
semi-transparent, six-legged, as I remember him, and every leg terminated
by a single claw hooked like a lion's and as formidable for the size of
the creature as that of the royal beast.

--Lives on a bumblebee, does he?--I said.  That's the way I call it.
Bumblebee or bumblybee and huckleberry.  Humblebee and whortleberry for
people that say Woos-ses-ter and Nor-wich.

--The Scarabee did not smile; he took no interest in trivial matters like
this.

--Lives on a bumblebee.  When you come to think of it, he must lead a
pleasant kind of life.  Sails through the air without the trouble of
flying.  Free pass everywhere that the bee goes.  No fear of being
dislodged; look at those six grappling-hooks.  Helps himself to such
juices of the bee as he likes best; the bee feeds on the choicest
vegetable nectars, and he feeds on the bee.  Lives either in the air or
in the perfumed pavilion of the fairest and sweetest flowers. Think what
tents the hollyhocks and the great lilies spread for him! And wherever he
travels a band of music goes with him, for this hum which wanders by us
is doubtless to him a vast and inspiring strain of melody.--I thought all
this, while the Scarabee supposed I was studying the minute characters of
the enigmatical specimen.

--I know what I consider your pediculus melittae, I said at length.

Do you think it really the larva of meloe?

--Oh, I don't know much about that, but I think he is the best cared for,
on the whole, of any animal that I know of; and if I wasn't a man I
believe I had rather be that little sybarite than anything that feasts at
the board of nature.

--The question is, whether he is the larva of meloe,--the Scarabee said,
as if he had not heard a word of what I had just been saying.----If I
live a few years longer it shall be settled, sir; and if my epitaph can
say honestly that I settled it, I shall be willing to trust my posthumous
fame to that achievement.

I said good morning to the specialist, and went off feeling not only
kindly, but respectfully towards him.  He is an enthusiast, at any rate,
as "earnest" a man as any philanthropic reformer who, having passed his
life in worrying people out of their misdoings into good behavior, comes
at last to a state in which he is never contented except when he is
making somebody uncomfortable.  He does certainly know one thing well,
very likely better than anybody in the world.

I find myself somewhat singularly placed at our table between a minute
philosopher who has concentrated all his faculties on a single subject,
and my friend who finds the present universe too restricted for his
intelligence.  I would not give much to hear what the Scarabee says about
the old Master, for he does not pretend to form a judgment of anything
but beetles, but I should like to hear what the Master has to say about
the Scarabee.  I waited after breakfast until he had gone, and then asked
the Master what he could make of our dried-up friend.

--Well,--he said,--I am hospitable enough in my feelings to him and all
his tribe.  These specialists are the coral-insects that build up a reef.
By and by it will be an island, and for aught we know may grow into a
continent.  But I don't want to be a coral-insect myself. I had rather be
a voyager that visits all the reefs and islands the creatures build, and
sails over the seas where they have as yet built up nothing.  I am a
little afraid that science is breeding us down too fast into
coral-insects.  A man like Newton or Leibnitz or Haller used to paint a
picture of outward or inward nature with a free hand, and stand back and
look at it as a whole and feel like an archangel; but nowadays you have a
Society, and they come together and make a great mosaic, each man
bringing his little bit and sticking it in its place, but so taken up
with his petty fragment that he never thinks of looking at the picture
the little bits make when they are put together.  You can't get any talk
out of these specialists away from their own subjects, any more than you
can get help from a policeman outside of his own beat.

--Yes,--said I,--but why should n't we always set a man talking about the
thing he knows best?

--No doubt, no doubt, if you meet him once; but what are you going to do
with him if you meet him every day?  I travel with a man and we want to
make change very often in paying bills.  But every time I ask him to
change a pistareen, or give me two fo'pencehappennies for a ninepence, or
help me to make out two and thrippence (mark the old Master's archaisms
about the currency), what does the fellow do but put his hand in his
pocket and pull out an old Roman coin; I have no change, says he, but
this assarion of Diocletian.  Mighty deal of good that'll do me!

--It isn't quite so handy as a few specimens of the modern currency would
be, but you can pump him on numismatics.

--To be sure, to be sure.  I've pumped a thousand men of all they could
teach me, or at least all I could learn from 'em; and if it comes to
that, I never saw the man that couldn't teach me something. I can get
along with everybody in his place, though I think the place of some of my
friends is over there among the feeble-minded pupils, and I don't believe
there's one of them, I couldn't go to school to for half an hour and be
the wiser for it.  But people you talk with every day have got to have
feeders for their minds, as much as the stream that turns a millwheel
has.  It isn't one little rill that's going to keep the float-boards
turning round.  Take a dozen of the brightest men you can find in the
brightest city, wherever that may be,--perhaps you and I think we
know,--and let 'em come together once a month, and you'll find out in the
course of a year or two the ones that have feeders from all the
hillsides.  Your common talkers, that exchange the gossip of the day,
have no wheel in particular to turn, and the wash of the rain as it runs
down the street is enough for them.

--Do you mean you can always see the sources from which a man fills his
mind,--his feeders, as you call them?

-I don't go quite so far as that,--the Master said.---I've seen men whose
minds were always overflowing, and yet they did n't read much nor go much
into the world.  Sometimes you'll find a bit of a pond-hole in a pasture,
and you'll plunge your walking-stick into it and think you are going to
touch bottom.  But you find you are mistaken. Some of these little
stagnant pond-holes are a good deal deeper than you think; you may tie a
stone to a bed-cord and not get soundings in some of 'em.  The country
boys will tell you they have no bottom, but that only means that they are
mighty deep; and so a good many stagnant, stupid-seeming people are a
great deal deeper than the length of your intellectual walking-stick, I
can tell you.  There are hidden springs that keep the little pond-holes
full when the mountain brooks are all dried up.  You poets ought to know
that.

--I can't help thinking you are more tolerant towards the specialists
than I thought at first, by the way you seemed to look at our dried-up
neighbor and his small pursuits.

--I don't like the word tolerant,--the Master said.---As long as the Lord
can tolerate me I think I can stand my fellow-creatures. Philosophically,
I love 'em all; empirically, I don't think I am very fond of all of 'em.
It depends on how you look at a man or a woman. Come here, Youngster,
will you? he said to That Boy.

The Boy was trying to catch a blue-bottle to add to his collection, and
was indisposed to give up the chase; but he presently saw that the Master
had taken out a small coin and laid it on the table, and felt himself
drawn in that direction.

Read that,--said the Master.

U-n-i-ni United States of America 5 cents.

The Master turned the coin over.  Now read that.

In God is our t-r-u-s-t--trust.  1869.

--Is that the same piece of money as the other one?

--There ain't any other one,--said the Boy, there ain't but one, but it's
got two sides to it with different reading.

--That 's it, that 's it,--said the Master,--two sides to everybody, as
there are to that piece of money.  I've seen an old woman that wouldn't
fetch five cents if you should put her up for sale at public auction; and
yet come to read the other side of her, she had a trust in God Almighty
that was like the bow anchor of a three-decker.  It's faith in something
and enthusiasm for something that makes a life worth looking at.  I don't
think your ant-eating specialist, with his sharp nose and pin-head eyes,
is the best every-day companion; but any man who knows one thing well is
worth listening to for once; and if you are of the large-brained variety
of the race, and want to fill out your programme of the Order of Things
in a systematic and exhaustive way, and get all the half-notes and flats
and sharps of humanity into your scale, you'd a great deal better shut
your front door and open your two side ones when you come across a fellow
that has made a real business of doing anything.

--That Boy stood all this time looking hard at the five-cent piece.

--Take it,--said the Master, with a good-natured smile.

--The Boy made a snatch at it and was off for the purpose of investing
it.

--A child naturally snaps at a thing as a dog does at his meat,--said the
Master.---If you think of it, we've all been quadrupeds.  A child that
can only crawl has all the instincts of a four-footed beast.  It carries
things in its mouth just as cats and dogs do.  I've seen the little
brutes do it over and over again.  I suppose a good many children would
stay quadrupeds all their lives, if they didn't learn the trick of
walking on their hind legs from seeing all the grown people walking in
that way.

--Do you accept Mr. Darwin's notions about the origin of the race?--said
I.

The Master looked at me with that twinkle in his eye which means that he
is going to parry a question.

--Better stick to Blair's Chronology; that settles it.  Adam and Eve,
created Friday, October 28th, B. C. 4004.  You've been in a ship for a
good while, and here comes Mr. Darwin on deck with an armful of sticks
and says, "Let's build a raft, and trust ourselves to that."

If your ship springs a leak, what would you do?

He looked me straight in the eyes for about half a minute.---If I heard
the pumps going, I'd look and see whether they were gaining on the leak
or not.  If they were gaining I'd stay where I was.---Go and find out
what's the matter with that young woman.

I had noticed that the Young Girl--the storywriter, our Scheherezade, as
I called her--looked as if she had been crying or lying awake half the
night.  I found on asking her,--for she is an honest little body and is
disposed to be confidential with me for some reason or other,--that she
had been doing both.

--And what was the matter now, I questioned her in a semi-paternal kind
of way, as soon as I got a chance for a few quiet words with her.

She was engaged to write a serial story, it seems, and had only got as
far as the second number, and some critic had been jumping upon it, she
said, and grinding his heel into it, till she couldn't bear to look at
it.  He said she did not write half so well as half a dozen other young
women.  She did n't write half so well as she used to write herself.  She
hadn't any characters and she had n't any incidents.  Then he went to
work to show how her story was coming out, trying to anticipate
everything she could make of it, so that her readers should have nothing
to look forward to, and he should have credit for his sagacity in
guessing, which was nothing so very wonderful, she seemed to think.
Things she had merely hinted and left the reader to infer, he told right
out in the bluntest and coarsest way.  It had taken all the life out of
her, she said.  It was just as if at a dinner-party one of the guests
should take a spoonful of soup and get up and say to the company, "Poor
stuff, poor stuff; you won't get anything better; let's go somewhere else
where things are fit to eat."

What do you read such things for, my dear? said I.

The film glistened in her eyes at the strange sound of those two soft
words; she had not heard such very often, I am afraid.

--I know I am a foolish creature to read them, she answered,--but I can't
help it; somebody always sends me everything that will make me wretched
to read, and so I sit down and read it, and ache all over for my pains,
and lie awake all night.

--She smiled faintly as she said this, for she saw the sub-ridiculous
side of it, but the film glittered still in her eyes.  There are a good
many real miseries in life that we cannot help smiling at, but they are
the smiles that make wrinkles and not dimples.  "Somebody always sends
her everything that will make her wretched."  Who can those creatures be
who cut out the offensive paragraph and send it anonymously to us, who
mail the newspaper which has the article we had much better not have
seen, who take care that we shall know everything which can, by any
possibility, help to make us discontented with ourselves and a little
less light-hearted than we were before we had been fools enough to open
their incendiary packages?  I don't like to say it to myself, but I
cannot help suspecting, in this instance, the doubtful-looking personage
who sits on my left, beyond the Scarabee.  I have some reason to think
that he has made advances to the Young Girl which were not favorably
received, to state the case in moderate terms, and it may be that he is
taking his revenge in cutting up the poor girl's story.  I know this very
well, that some personal pique or favoritism is at the bottom of half the
praise and dispraise which pretend to be so very ingenuous and
discriminating.  (Of course I have been thinking all this time and
telling you what I thought.)

--What you want is encouragement, my dear, said I,--I know that as well,
as you.  I don't think the fellows that write such criticisms as you tell
me of want to correct your faults.  I don't mean to say that you can
learn nothing from them, because they are not all fools by any means, and
they will often pick out your weak points with a malignant sagacity, as a
pettifogging lawyer will frequently find a real flaw in trying to get at
everything he can quibble about.  But is there nobody who will praise you
generously when you do well,--nobody that will lend you a hand now while
you want it,--or must they all wait until you have made yourself a name
among strangers, and then all at once find out that you have something in
you? Oh,--said the girl, and the bright film gathered too fast for her
young eyes to hold much longer,--I ought not to be ungrateful!  I have
found the kindest friend in the world.  Have you ever heard the Lady--the
one that I sit next to at the table--say anything about me?

I have not really made her acquaintance, I said.  She seems to me a
little distant in her manners and I have respected her pretty evident
liking for keeping mostly to herself.

--Oh, but when you once do know her!  I don't believe I could write
stories all the time as I do, if she didn't ask me up to her chamber, and
let me read them to her.  Do you know, I can make her laugh and cry,
reading my poor stories?  And sometimes, when I feel as if I had written
out all there is in me, and want to lie down and go to sleep and never
wake up except in a world where there are no weekly papers,--when
everything goes wrong, like a car off the track,--she takes hold and sets
me on the rails again all right.

--How does she go to work to help you?

--Why, she listens to my stories, to begin with, as if she really liked
to hear them.  And then you know I am dreadfully troubled now and then
with some of my characters, and can't think how to get rid of them.  And
she'll say, perhaps, Don't shoot your villain this time, you've shot
three or four already in the last six weeks; let his mare stumble and
throw him and break his neck.  Or she'll give me a hint about some new
way for my lover to make a declaration.  She must have had a good many
offers, it's my belief, for she has told me a dozen different ways for me
to use in my stories.  And whenever I read a story to her, she always
laughs and cries in the right places; and that's such a comfort, for
there are some people that think everything pitiable is so funny, and
will burst out laughing when poor Rip Van Winkle--you've seen Mr.
Jefferson, haven't you?--is breaking your heart for you if you have one.
Sometimes she takes a poem I have written and reads it to me so
beautifully, that I fall in love with it, and sometimes she sets my
verses to music and sings them to me.

--You have a laugh together sometimes, do you?

--Indeed we do.  I write for what they call the "Comic Department" of the
paper now and then.  If I did not get so tired of story-telling, I
suppose I should be gayer than I am; but as it is, we two get a little
fun out of my comic pieces.  I begin them half-crying sometimes, but
after they are done they amuse me.  I don't suppose my comic pieces are
very laughable; at any rate the man who makes a business of writing me
down says the last one I wrote is very melancholy reading, and that if it
was only a little better perhaps some bereaved person might pick out a
line or two that would do to put on a gravestone.

--Well, that is hard, I must confess.  Do let me see those lines which
excite such sad emotions.

--Will you read them very good-naturedly?  If you will, I will get the
paper that has "Aunt Tabitha."  That is the one the fault-finder said
produced such deep depression of feeling.  It was written for the "Comic
Department."  Perhaps it will make you cry, but it was n't meant to.

--I will finish my report this time with our Scheherezade's poem, hoping
that--any critic who deals with it will treat it with the courtesy due to
all a young lady's literary efforts.

               AUNT TABITHA.

     Whatever I do, and whatever I say,
     Aunt Tabitha tells me that isn't the way;
     When she was a girl (forty summers ago)
     Aunt Tabitha tells me they never did so.

     Dear aunt!  If I only would take her advice!
     But I like my own way, and I find it so nice!
     And besides, I forget half the things I am told;
     But they all will come back to me--when I am old.

     If a youth passes by, it may happen, no doubt,
     He may chance to look in as I chance to look out;
     She would never endure an impertinent stare,
     It is horrid, she says, and I mustn't sit there.

     A walk in the moonlight has pleasures, I own,
     But it is n't quite safe to be walking alone;
     So I take a lad's arm,--just for safety, you know,
     But Aunt Tabitha tells me they didn't do so.

     How wicked we are, and how good they were then!
     They kept at arm's length those detestable men;
     What an era of virtue she lived in!--But stay
     Were the men all such rogues in Aunt Tabitha's day?

     If the men were so wicked, I'll ask my papa
     How he dared to propose to my darling mamma;
     Was he like the rest of them?  Goodness!  Who knows
     And what shall I say if a wretch should propose?

     I am thinking if aunt knew so little of sin,
     What a wonder Aunt Tabitha's aunt must have been!
     And her grand-aunt--it scares me--how shockingly sad.
     That we girls of to-day are so frightfully bad!

     A martyr will save us, and nothing else can;
     Let me perish--to rescue some wretched young man!
     Though when to the altar a victim I go,
     Aunt Tabitha'll tell me she never did so!




IV

The old Master has developed one quality of late for which I am afraid I
hardly gave him credit.  He has turned out to be an excellent listener.

--I love to talk,--he said,--as a goose loves to swim.  Sometimes I think
it is because I am a goose.  For I never talked much at any one time in
my life without saying something or other I was sorry for.

--You too!--said I--Now that is very odd, for it is an experience I have
habitually.  I thought you were rather too much of a philosopher to
trouble yourself about such small matters as to whether you had said just
what you meant to or not; especially as you know that the person you talk
to does not remember a word of what you said the next morning, but is
thinking, it is much more likely, of what she said, or how her new dress
looked, or some other body's new dress which made--hers look as if it had
been patched together from the leaves of last November.  That's what
she's probably thinking about.

--She!--said the Master, with a look which it would take at least half a
page to explain to the entire satisfaction of thoughtful readers of both
sexes.

--I paid the respect due to that most significant monosyllable, which, as
the old Rabbi spoke it, with its targum of tone and expression, was not
to be answered flippantly, but soberly, advisedly, and after a pause long
enough for it to unfold its meaning in the listener's mind.  For there
are short single words (all the world remembers Rachel's Helas!) which
are like those Japanese toys that look like nothing of any significance
as you throw them on the water, but which after a little time open out
into various strange and unexpected figures, and then you find that each
little shred had a complicated story to tell of itself.

-Yes,--said I, at the close of this silent interval, during which the
monosyllable had been opening out its meanings,--She.  When I think of
talking, it is of course with a woman.  For talking at its best being an
inspiration, it wants a corresponding divine quality of receptiveness;
and where will you find this but in woman?

The Master laughed a pleasant little laugh,--not a harsh, sarcastic one,
but playful, and tempered by so kind a look that it seemed as if every
wrinkled line about his old eyes repeated, "God bless you," as the
tracings on the walls of the Alhambra repeat a sentence of the Koran.

I said nothing, but looked the question, What are you laughing at?

--Why, I laughed because I couldn't help saying to myself that a woman
whose mind was taken up with thinking how she looked, and how her pretty
neighbor looked, wouldn't have a great deal of thought to spare for all
your fine discourse.

--Come, now,--said I,--a man who contradicts himself in the course of two
minutes must have a screw loose in his mental machinery.  I never feel
afraid that such a thing can happen to me, though it happens often enough
when I turn a thought over suddenly, as you did that five-cent piece the
other day, that it reads differently on its two sides.  What I meant to
say is something like this.  A woman, notwithstanding she is the best of
listeners, knows her business, and it is a woman's business to please.  I
don't say that it is not her business to vote, but I do say that a woman
who does not please is a false note in the harmonies of nature.  She may
not have youth, or beauty, or even manner; but she must have something in
her voice or expression, or both, which it makes you feel better disposed
towards your race to look at or listen to.  She knows that as well as we
do; and her first question after you have been talking your soul into her
consciousness is, Did I please?  A woman never forgets her sex.  She
would rather talk with a man than an angel, any day.

--This frightful speech of mine reached the ear of our Scheherezade, who
said that it was perfectly shocking and that I deserved to be shown up as
the outlaw in one of her bandit stories.

Hush, my dear,--said the Lady,--you will have to bring John Milton into
your story with our friend there, if you punish everybody who says
naughty things like that.  Send the little boy up to my chamber for
Paradise Lost, if you please.  He will find it lying on my table. The
little old volume,--he can't mistake it.

So the girl called That Boy round and gave him the message; I don't know
why she should give it, but she did, and the Lady helped her out with a
word or two.

The little volume--its cover protected with soft white leather from a
long kid glove, evidently suggesting the brilliant assemblies of the days
when friends and fortune smiled-came presently and the Lady opened
it.---You may read that, if you like, she said,--it may show you that our
friend is to be pilloried in good company.

The Young Girl ran her eye along the passage the Lady pointed out,
blushed, laughed, and slapped the book down as though she would have
liked to box the ears of Mr. John Milton, if he had been a contemporary
and fellow-contributor to the "Weekly Bucket."--I won't touch the
thing,--she said.---He was a horrid man to talk so: and he had as many
wives as Blue-Beard.

--Fair play,--said the Master.---Bring me the book, my little fractional
superfluity,--I mean you, my nursling,--my boy, if that suits your small
Highness better.

The Boy brought the book.

The old Master, not unfamiliar with the great epic opened pretty nearly
to the place, and very soon found the passage: He read, aloud with grand
scholastic intonation and in a deep voice that silenced the table as if a
prophet had just uttered Thus saith the Lord:--

    "So spake our sire, and by his countenance seemed
     Entering on studious thoughts abstruse; which Eve
     Perceiving--"

went to water her geraniums, to make a short story of it, and left the
two "conversationists," to wit, the angel Raphael and the
gentleman,--there was but one gentleman in society then, you know,--to
talk it out.

    "Yet went she not, as not with such discourse
     Delighted, or not capable her ear
     Of what was high; such pleasure she reserved,
     Adam relating, she sole auditress;
     Her husband the relater she preferred
     Before the angel, and of him to ask
     Chose rather; he she knew would intermix
     Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute
     With conjugal caresses: from his lips
     Not words alone pleased her."

Everybody laughed, except the Capitalist, who was a little hard of
hearing, and the Scarabee, whose life was too earnest for demonstrations
of that kind.  He had his eyes fixed on the volume, however, with eager
interest.

--The p'int 's carried,--said the Member of the Haouse.

Will you let me look at that book a single minute?--said the Scarabee.  I
passed it to him, wondering what in the world he wanted of Paradise Lost.

Dermestes lardarius,--he said, pointing to a place where the edge of one
side of the outer cover had been slightly tasted by some insect.--Very
fond of leather while they 're in the larva state.

--Damage the goods as bad as mice,--said the Salesman.

--Eat half the binding off Folio 67,--said the Register of Deeds.
Something did, anyhow, and it was n't mice.  Found the shelf covered with
little hairy cases belonging to something or other that had no business
there.

Skins of the Dermestes lardaraus,--said the Scarabee,--you can always
tell them by those brown hairy coats.  That 's the name to give them.

--What good does it do to give 'em a name after they 've eat the binding
off my folios?--asked the Register of Deeds.

The Scarabee had too much respect for science to answer such a question
as that; and the book, having served its purposes, was passed back to the
Lady.

I return to the previous question,--said I,--if our friend the Member of
the House of Representatives will allow me to borrow the phrase. Womanly
women are very kindly critics, except to themselves and now and then to
their own sex.  The less there is of sex about a woman, the more she is
to be dreaded.  But take a real woman at her best moment,--well dressed
enough to be pleased with herself, not so resplendent as to be a show and
a sensation, with those varied outside influences which set vibrating the
harmonic notes of her nature stirring in the air about her, and what has
social life to compare with one of those vital interchanges of thought
and feeling with her that make an hour memorable?  What can equal her
tact, her delicacy, her subtlety of apprehension, her quickness to feel
the changes of temperature as the warm and cool currents of talk blow by
turns?  At one moment she is microscopically intellectual, critical,
scrupulous in judgment as an analyst's balance, and the next as
sympathetic as the open rose that sweetens the wind from whatever quarter
it finds its way to her bosom.  It is in the hospitable soul of a woman
that a man forgets he is a stranger, and so becomes natural and truthful,
at the same time that he is mesmerized by all those divine differences
which make her a mystery and a bewilderment to--

If you fire your popgun at me, you little chimpanzee, I will stick a pin
right through the middle of you and put you into one of this gentleman's
beetle-cases!

I caught the imp that time, but what started him was more than I could
guess.  It is rather hard that this spoiled child should spoil such a
sentence as that was going to be; but the wind shifted all at once, and
the talk had to come round on another tack, or at least fall off a point
or two from its course.

--I'll tell you who I think are the best talkers in all probability,
--said I to the Master, who, as I mentioned, was developing interesting
talent as a listener,--poets who never write verses.  And there are a
good many more of these than it would seem at first sight.  I think you
may say every young lover is a poet, to begin with.  I don't mean either
that all young lovers are good talkers,--they have an eloquence all
their own when they are with the beloved object, no doubt, emphasized
after the fashion the solemn bard of Paradise refers to with such
delicious humor in the passage we just heard,--but a little talk goes a
good way in most of these cooing matches, and it wouldn't do to report
them too literally.  What I mean is, that a man with the gift of musical
and impassioned phrase (and love often deeds that to a young person for a
while), who "wreaks" it, to borrow Byron's word, on conversation as the
natural outlet of his sensibilities and spiritual activities, is likely
to talk better than the poet, who plays on the instrument of verse.  A
great pianist or violinist is rarely a great singer.  To write a poem is
to expend the vital force which would have made one brilliant for an hour
or two, and to expend it on an instrument with more pipes, reeds, keys,
stops, and pedals than the Great Organ that shakes New England every time
it is played in full blast.

Do you mean that it is hard work to write a poem?--said the old
Master.---I had an idea that a poem wrote itself, as it were, very often;
that it came by influx, without voluntary effort; indeed, you have spoken
of it as an inspiration rather than a result of volition.

--Did you ever see a great ballet-dancer?--I asked him.

--I have seen Taglioni,--he answered.---She used to take her steps rather
prettily.  I have seen the woman that danced the capstone on to Bunker
Hill Monument, as Orpheus moved the rocks by music, the Elssler
woman,--Fanny Elssler.  She would dance you a rigadoon or cut a pigeon's
wing for you very respectably.

(Confound this old college book-worm,----he has seen everything!)

Well, did these two ladies dance as if it was hard work to them?

--Why no, I should say they danced as if they liked it and couldn't help
dancing; they looked as if they felt so "corky" it was hard to keep them
down.

--And yet they had been through such work to get their limbs strong and
flexible and obedient, that a cart-horse lives an easy life compared to
theirs while they were in training.

--The Master cut in just here--I had sprung the trap of a reminiscence.

--When I was a boy,--he said,--some of the mothers in our small town, who
meant that their children should know what was what as well as other
people's children, laid their heads together and got a dancing-master to
come out from the city and give instruction at a few dollars a quarter to
the young folks of condition in the village. Some of their husbands were
ministers and some were deacons, but the mothers knew what they were
about, and they did n't see any reason why ministers' and deacons' wives'
children shouldn't have as easy manners as the sons and daughters of
Belial.  So, as I tell you, they got a dancing-master to come out to our
place,--a man of good repute, a most respectable man,--madam (to the
Landlady), you must remember the worthy old citizen, in his advanced age,
going about the streets, a most gentlemanly bundle of infirmities,--only
he always cocked his hat a little too much on one side, as they do here
and there along the Connecticut River, and sometimes on our city
sidewalks, when they've got a new beaver; they got him, I say, to give us
boys and girls lessons in dancing and deportment.  He was as gray and as
lively as a squirrel, as I remember him, and used to spring up in the air
and "cross his feet," as we called it, three times before he came down.
Well, at the end of each term there was what they called an "exhibition
ball," in which the scholars danced cotillons and country-dances; also
something called a "gavotte," and I think one or more walked a minuet.
But all this is not what--I wanted to say.  At this exhibition ball he
used to bring out a number of hoops wreathed with roses, of the perennial
kind, by the aid of which a number of amazingly complicated and startling
evolutions were exhibited; and also his two daughters, who figured
largely in these evolutions, and whose wonderful performances to us, who
had not seen Miss Taglioni or Miss Elssler, were something quite
bewildering, in fact, surpassing the natural possibilities of human
beings.  Their extraordinary powers were, however, accounted for by the
following explanation, which was accepted in the school as entirely
satisfactory.  A certain little bone in the ankles of each of these young
girls had been broken intentionally, secundum artem, at a very early age,
and thus they had been fitted to accomplish these surprising feats which
threw the achievements of the children who were left in the condition of
the natural man into ignominious shadow.

--Thank you,--said I,--you have helped out my illustration so as to make
it better than I expected.  Let me begin again.  Every poem that is
worthy of the name, no matter how easily it seems to be written,
represents a great amount of vital force expended at some time or other.
When you find a beach strewed with the shells and other spoils that
belonged once to the deep sea, you know the tide has been there, and that
the winds and waves have wrestled over its naked sands.  And so, if I
find a poem stranded in my soul and have nothing to do but seize it as a
wrecker carries off the treasure he finds cast ashore, I know I have paid
at some time for that poem with some inward commotion, were it only an
excess of enjoyment, which has used up just so much of my vital capital.
But besides all the impressions that furnished the stuff of the poem,
there has been hard work to get the management of that wonderful
instrument I spoke of,---the great organ, language.  An artist who works
in marble or colors has them all to himself and his tribe, but the man
who moulds his thought in verse has to employ the materials vulgarized by
everybody's use, and glorify them by his handling.  I don't know that you
must break any bones in a poet's mechanism before his thought can dance
in rhythm, but read your Milton and see what training, what patient
labor, it took before he could shape our common speech into his majestic
harmonies.

It is rather singular, but the same kind of thing has happened to me not
very rarely before, as I suppose it has to most persons, that just when I
happened to be thinking about poets and their conditions, this very
morning, I saw a paragraph or two from a foreign paper which is apt to be
sharp, if not cynical, relating to the same matter.  I can't help it; I
want to have my talk about it, and if I say the same things that writer
did, somebody else can have the satisfaction of saying I stole them all.

[I thought the person whom I have called hypothetically the Man of
Letters changed color a little and betrayed a certain awkward
consciousness that some of us were looking at him or thinking of him; but
I am a little suspicious about him and may do him wrong.]

That poets are treated as privileged persons by their admirers and the
educated public can hardly be disputed.  That they consider themselves so
there is no doubt whatever.  On the whole, I do not know so easy a way of
shirking all the civic and social and domestic duties, as to settle it in
one's mind that one is a poet.  I have, therefore, taken great pains to
advise other persons laboring under the impression that they were gifted
beings, destined to soar in the atmosphere of song above the vulgar
realities of earth, not to neglect any homely duty under the influence of
that impression.  The number of these persons is so great that if they
were suffered to indulge their prejudice against every-day duties and
labors, it would be a serious loss to the productive industry of the
country.  My skirts are clear (so far as other people are concerned) of
countenancing that form of intellectual opium-eating in which rhyme takes
the place of the narcotic.  But what are you going to do when you find
John Keats an apprentice to a surgeon or apothecary?  Is n't it rather
better to get another boy to sweep out the shop and shake out the powders
and stir up the mixtures, and leave him undisturbed to write his Ode on a
Grecian Urn or to a Nightingale?  Oh yes, the critic I have referred to
would say, if he is John Keats; but not if he is of a much lower grade,
even though he be genuine, what there is of him.  But the trouble is, the
sensitive persons who belong to the lower grades of the poetical
hierarchy do not--know their own poetical limitations, while they do feel
a natural unfitness and disinclination for many pursuits which young
persons of the average balance of faculties take to pleasantly enough.
What is forgotten is this, that every real poet, even of the humblest
grade, is an artist. Now I venture to say that any painter or sculptor of
real genius, though he may do nothing more than paint flowers and fruit,
or carve cameos, is considered a privileged person.  It is recognized
perfectly that to get his best work he must be insured the freedom from
disturbances which the creative power absolutely demands, more absolutely
perhaps in these slighter artists than in the great masters.  His nerves
must be steady for him to finish a rose-leaf or the fold of a nymph's
drapery in his best manner; and they will be unsteadied if he has to
perform the honest drudgery which another can do for him quite as well.
And it is just so with the poet, though he were only finishing an
epigram; you must no more meddle roughly with him than you would shake a
bottle of Chambertin and expect the "sunset glow" to redden your glass
unclouded.  On the other hand, it may be said that poetry is not an
article of prime necessity, and potatoes are.  There is a disposition in
many persons just now to deny the poet his benefit of clergy, and to hold
him no better than other people.  Perhaps he is not, perhaps he is not so
good, half the time; but he is a luxury, and if you want him you must pay
for him, by not trying to make a drudge of him while he is all his
lifetime struggling with the chills and heats of his artistic
intermittent fever.

There may have been some lesser interruptions during the talk I have
reported as if it was a set speech, but this was the drift of what I said
and should have said if the other man, in the Review I referred to, had
not seen fit to meddle with the subject, as some fellow always does, just
about the time when I am going to say something about it.  The old Master
listened beautifully, except for cutting in once, as I told you he did.
But now he had held in as long as it was in his nature to contain
himself, and must have his say or go off in an apoplexy, or explode in
some way.--I think you're right about the poets,--he said.--They are to
common folks what repeaters are to ordinary watches.  They carry music in
their inside arrangements, but they want to be handled carefully or you
put them out of order.  And perhaps you must n't expect them to be quite
as good timekeepers as the professional chronometer watches that make a
specialty of being exact within a few seconds a month.  They think too
much of themselves.  So does everybody that considers himself as having a
right to fall back on what he calls his idiosyncrasy.  Yet a man has such
a right, and it is no easy thing to adjust the private claim to the fair
public demand on him.  Suppose you are subject to tic douloureux, for
instance.  Every now and then a tiger that nobody can see catches one
side of your face between his jaws and holds on till he is tired and lets
go.  Some concession must be made to you on that score, as everybody can
see.  It is fair to give you a seat that is not in the draught, and your
friends ought not to find fault with you if you do not care to join a
party that is going on a sleigh-ride. Now take a poet like Cowper.  He
had a mental neuralgia, a great deal worse in many respects than tic
douloureux confined to the face.  It was well that he was sheltered and
relieved, by the cares of kind friends, especially those good women, from
as many of the burdens of life as they could lift off from him.  I am
fair to the poets,--don't you agree that I am?

Why, yes,--I said,--you have stated the case fairly enough, a good deal
as I should have put it myself.

Now, then,--the Master continued,--I 'll tell you what is necessary to
all these artistic idiosyncrasies to bring them into good square human
relations outside of the special province where their ways differ from
those of other people.  I am going to illustrate what I mean by a
comparison.  I don't know, by the way, but you would be disposed to think
and perhaps call me a wine-bibber on the strength of the freedom with
which I deal with that fluid for the purposes of illustration.  But I
make mighty little use of it, except as it furnishes me an image now and
then, as it did, for that matter, to the Disciples and their Master.  In
my younger days they used to bring up the famous old wines, the
White-top, the Juno, the Eclipse, the Essex Junior, and the rest, in
their old cobwebbed, dusty bottles.  The resurrection of one of these old
sepulchred dignitaries had something of solemnity about it; it was like
the disinterment of a king; the bringing to light of the Royal Martyr
King Charles I., for instance, that Sir Henry Halford gave such an
interesting account of.  And the bottle seemed to inspire a personal
respect; it was wrapped in a napkin and borne tenderly and reverently
round to the guests, and sometimes a dead silence went before the first
gush of its amber flood, and

    "The boldest held his breath
     For a time."

But nowadays the precious juice of a long-dead vintage is transferred
carefully into a cut-glass decanter, and stands side by side with the
sherry from a corner grocery, which looks just as bright and apparently
thinks just as well of itself.  The old historic Madeiras, which have
warmed the periods of our famous rhetoricians of the past and burned in
the impassioned eloquence of our earlier political demigods, have nothing
to mark them externally but a bit of thread, it may be, round the neck of
the decanter, or a slip of ribbon, pink on one of them and blue on
another.

Go to a London club,--perhaps I might find something nearer home that
would serve my turn,--but go to a London club, and there you will see the
celebrities all looking alike modern, all decanted off from their
historic antecedents and their costume of circumstance into the every-day
aspect of the gentleman of common cultivated society.  That is Sir Coeur
de Lion Plantagenet in the mutton-chop whiskers and the plain gray suit;
there is the Laureate in a frockcoat like your own, and the leader of the
House of Commons in a necktie you do not envy. That is the kind of thing
you want to take the nonsense out of you. If you are not decanted off
from yourself every few days or weeks, you will think it sacrilege to
brush a cobweb from your cork by and by.  O little fool, that has
published a little book full of little poems or other sputtering tokens
of an uneasy condition, how I love you for the one soft nerve of special
sensibility that runs through your exiguous organism, and the one
phosphorescent particle in your unilluminated intelligence!  But if you
don't leave your spun-sugar confectionery business once in a while, and
come out among lusty men,--the bristly, pachydermatous fellows that hew
out the highways for the material progress of society, and the
broad-shouldered, out-of-door men that fight for the great prizes of
life,--you will come to think that the spun-sugar business is the chief
end of man, and begin to feel and look as if you believed yourself as
much above common people as that personage of whom Tourgueneff says that
"he had the air of his own statue erected by national subscription."

--The Master paused and fell into a deep thinking fit, as he does
sometimes.  He had had his own say, it is true, but he had established
his character as a listener to my own perfect satisfaction, for I, too,
was conscious of having preached with a certain prolixity.

--I am always troubled when I think of my very limited mathematical
capacities.  It seems as if every well-organized mind should be able to
handle numbers and quantities through their symbols to an indefinite
extent; and yet, I am puzzled by what seems to a clever boy with a turn
for calculation as plain as counting his fingers.  I don't think any man
feels well grounded in knowledge unless he has a good basis of
mathematical certainties, and knows how to deal with them and apply them
to every branch of knowledge where they can come in to advantage.

Our Young Astronomer is known for his mathematical ability, and I asked
him what he thought was the difficulty in the minds that are weak in that
particular direction, while they may be of remarkable force in other
provinces of thought, as is notoriously the case with some men of great
distinction in science.

The young man smiled and wrote a few letters and symbols on a piece of
paper.---Can you see through that at once?--he said.

I puzzled over it for some minutes and gave it up.

--He said, as I returned it to him, You have heard military men say that
such a person had an eye for country, have n't you?  One man will note
all the landmarks, keep the points of compass in his head, observe how
the streams run, in short, carry a map in his brain of any region that he
has marched or galloped through.  Another man takes no note of any of
these things; always follows somebody else's lead when he can, and gets
lost if he is left to himself; a mere owl in daylight.  Just so some men
have an eye for an equation, and would read at sight the one that you
puzzled over.  It is told of Sir Isaac Newton that he required no
demonstration of the propositions in Euclid's Geometry, but as soon as he
had read the enunciation the solution or answer was plain at once.  The
power may be cultivated, but I think it is to a great degree a natural
gift, as is the eye for color, as is the ear for music.

--I think I could read equations readily enough,--I said,--if I could
only keep my attention fixed on them; and I think I could keep my
attention on them if I were imprisoned in a thinking-cell, such as the
Creative Intelligence shapes for its studio when at its divinest work.

The young man's lustrous eyes opened very widely as he asked me to
explain what I meant.

--What is the Creator's divinest work?--I asked.

--Is there anything more divine than the sun; than a sun with its planets
revolving about it, warming them, lighting them, and giving conscious
life to the beings that move on them?

--You agree, then, that conscious life is the grand aim and end of all
this vast mechanism.  Without life that could feel and enjoy, the
splendors and creative energy would all be thrown away.  You know
Harvey's saying, omnia animalia ex ovo,--all animals come from an egg.
You ought to know it, for the great controversy going on about
spontaneous generation has brought it into special prominence lately.
Well, then, the ovum, the egg, is, to speak in human phrase, the
Creator's more private and sacred studio, for his magnum opus.  Now, look
at a hen's egg, which is a convenient one to study, because it is large
enough and built solidly enough to look at and handle easily.  That would
be the form I would choose for my thinking-cell. Build me an oval with
smooth, translucent walls, and put me in the centre of it with Newton's
"Principia" or Kant's "Kritik," and I think I shall develop "an eye for
an equation," as you call it, and a capacity for an abstraction.

But do tell me,--said the Astronomer, a little incredulously,--what there
is in that particular form which is going to help you to be a
mathematician or a metaphysician?

--It is n't help I want, it is removing hindrances.  I don't want to see
anything to draw off my attention.  I don't want a cornice, or an angle,
or anything but a containing curve.  I want diffused light and no single
luminous centre to fix my eye, and so distract my mind from its one
object of contemplation.  The metaphysics of attention have hardly been
sounded to their depths.  The mere fixing the look on any single object
for a long time may produce very strange effects. Gibbon's well-known
story of the monks of Mount Athos and their contemplative practice is
often laughed over, but it has a meaning. They were to shut the door of
the cell, recline the beard and chin on the breast, and contemplate the
abdominal centre.

"At first all will be dark and comfortless; but if you persevere day and
night, you will feel an ineffable joy; and no sooner has the soul
discovered the place of the heart, than it is involved in a mystic and
ethereal light."  And Mr.  Braid produces absolute anaesthesia, so that
surgical operations can be performed without suffering to the patient,
only by making him fix his eyes and his mind on a single object; and
Newton is said to have said, as you remember, "I keep the subject
constantly before me, and wait till the first dawnings open slowly by
little and little into a full and clear light."  These are different, but
certainly very wonderful, instances of what can be done by attention.
But now suppose that your mind is in its nature discursive, erratic,
subject to electric attractions and repulsions, volage; it may be
impossible for you to compel your attention except by taking away all
external disturbances.  I think the poets have an advantage and a
disadvantage as compared with the steadier-going people.  Life is so
vivid to the poet, that he is too eager to seize and exhaust its
multitudinous impressions.  Like Sindbad in the valley of precious
stones, he wants to fill his pockets with diamonds, but, lo! there is a
great ruby like a setting sun in its glory, and a sapphire that, like
Bryant's blue gentian, seems to have dropped from the cerulean walls of
heaven, and a nest of pearls that look as if they might be unhatched
angel's eggs, and so he hardly knows what to seize, and tries for too
many, and comes out of the enchanted valley with more gems than he can
carry, and those that he lets fall by the wayside we call his poems.  You
may change the image a thousand ways to show you how hard it is to make a
mathematician or a logician out of a poet.  He carries the tropics with
him wherever he goes; he is in the true sense felius naturae, and Nature
tempts him, as she tempts a child walking through a garden where all the
finest fruits are hanging over him and dropping round him, where

     The luscious clusters of the vine
     Upon (his) mouth do crush their wine,
     The nectarine and curious peach,
     Into (his) hands themselves do reach;

and he takes a bite out of the sunny side of this and the other, and,
ever stimulated and never satisfied, is hurried through the garden, and,
before he knows it, finds himself at an iron gate which opens outward,
and leaves the place he knows and loves--

--For one he will perhaps soon learn to love and know better,--said the
Master.---But I can help you out with another comparison, not quite so
poetical as yours.  Why did not you think of a railway-station, where the
cars stop five minutes for refreshments?  Is n't that a picture of the
poet's hungry and hurried feast at the banquet of life?  The traveller
flings himself on the bewildering miscellany of delicacies spread before
him, the various tempting forms of ambrosia and seducing draughts of
nectar, with the same eager hurry and restless ardor that you describe in
the poet.  Dear me!  If it wasn't for All aboard! that summons of the
deaf conductor which tears one away from his half-finished sponge-cake
and coffee, how I, who do not call myself a poet, but only a questioner,
should have enjoyed a good long stop--say a couple of thousand years--at
this way-station on the great railroad leading to the unknown terminus!

--You say you are not a poet,--I said, after a little pause, in which I
suppose both of us were thinking where the great railroad would land us
after carrying us into the dark tunnel, the farther end of which no man
has seen and taken a return train to bring us news about it,--you say you
are not a poet, and yet it seems to me you have some of the elements
which go to make one.

--I don't think you mean to flatter me,--the Master answered,--and, what
is more, for I am not afraid to be honest with you, I don't think you do
flatter me.  I have taken the inventory of my faculties as calmly as if I
were an appraiser.  I have some of the qualities, perhaps I may say many
of the qualities, that make a man a poet, and yet I am not one.  And in
the course of a pretty wide experience of men--and women--(the Master
sighed, I thought, but perhaps I was mistaken)--I have met a good many
poets who were not rhymesters and a good many rhymesters who were not
poets.  So I am only one of the Voiceless, that I remember one of you
singers had some verses about. I think there is a little music in me, but
it has not found a voice, and it never will.  If I should confess the
truth, there is no mere earthly immortality that I envy so much as the
poet's.  If your name is to live at all, it is so much more to have it
live in people's hearts than only in their brains!  I don't know that
one's eyes fill with tears when he thinks of the famous inventor of
logarithms, but song of Burns's or a hymn of Charles Wesley's goes
straight to your heart, and you can't help loving both of them, the
sinner as well as the saint.  The works of other men live, but their
personality dies out of their labors; the poet, who reproduces himself in
his creation, as no other artist does or can, goes down to posterity with
all his personality blended with whatever is imperishable in his song.
We see nothing of the bees that built the honeycomb and stored it with
its sweets, but we can trace the veining in the wings of insects that
flitted through the forests which are now coal-beds, kept unchanging in
the amber that holds them; and so the passion of Sappho, the tenderness
of Simonides, the purity of holy George Herbert, the lofty
contemplativeness of James Shirley, are before us to-day as if they were
living, in a few tears of amber verse.  It seems, when one reads,

     "Sweet day! so cool, so calm, so bright,"

or,

     "The glories of our birth and state,"

as if it were not a very difficult matter to gain immortality,--such an
immortality at least as a perishable language can give.  A single lyric
is enough, if one can only find in his soul and finish in his intellect
one of those jewels fit to sparkle "on the stretched forefinger of all
time." A coin, a ring, a string of verses.  These last, and hardly
anything else does.  Every century is an overloaded ship that must sink
at last with most of its cargo.  The small portion of its crew that get
on board the new vessel which takes them off don't pretend to save a
great many of the bulky articles.  But they must not and will not leave
behind the hereditary jewels of the race; and if you have found and cut a
diamond, were it only a spark with a single polished facet, it will stand
a better chance of being saved from the wreck than anything, no matter
what, that wants much room for stowage.

The pyramids last, it is true, but most of them have forgotten their
builders' names.  But the ring of Thothmes III., who reigned some
fourteen hundred years before our era, before Homer sang, before the
Argonauts sailed, before Troy was built, is in the possession of Lord
Ashburnham, and proclaims the name of the monarch who wore it more than
three thousand years ago.  The gold coins with the head of Alexander the
Great are some of them so fresh one might think they were newer than much
of the silver currency we were lately handling. As we have been quoting
from the poets this morning, I will follow the precedent, and give some
lines from an epistle of Pope to Addison after the latter had written,
but not yet published, his Dialogue on Medals.  Some of these lines have
been lingering in my memory for a great many years, but I looked at the
original the other day and was so pleased with them that I got them by
heart.  I think you will say they are singularly pointed and elegant.

    "Ambition sighed; she found it vain to trust
     The faithless column and the crumbling bust;
     Huge moles, whose shadows stretched from shore to shore,
     Their ruins perished, and their place no more!
     Convinced, she now contracts her vast design,
     And all her triumphs shrink into a coin.
     A narrow orb each crowded conquest keeps,
     Beneath her palm here sad Judaea weeps;
     Now scantier limits the proud arch confine,
     And scarce are seen the prostrate Nile or Rhine;
     A small Euphrates through the piece is rolled,
     And little eagles wave their wings in gold."

It is the same thing in literature.  Write half a dozen folios full of
other people's ideas (as all folios are pretty sure to be), and you serve
as ballast to the lower shelves of a library, about as like to be
disturbed as the kentledge in the hold of a ship.  Write a story, or a
dozen stories, and your book will be in demand like an oyster while it is
freshly opened, and after tha--.  The highways of literature are spread
over with the shells of dead novels, each of which has been swallowed at
a mouthful by the public, and is done with.  But write a volume of poems.
No matter if they are all bad but one, if that one is very good.  It will
carry your name down to posterity like the ring of Thothmes, like the
coin of Alexander.  I don't suppose one would care a great deal about it
a hundred or a thousand years after he is dead, but I don't feel quite
sure.  It seems as if, even in heaven, King David might remember "The
Lord is my Shepherd" with a certain twinge of earthly pleasure.  But we
don't know, we don't know.

--What in the world can have become of That Boy and his popgun while all
this somewhat extended sermonizing was going on?  I don't wonder you ask,
beloved Reader, and I suppose I must tell you how we got on so long
without interruption.  Well, the plain truth is, the youngster was
contemplating his gastric centre, like the monks of Mount Athos, but in a
less happy state of mind than those tranquil recluses, in consequence of
indulgence in the heterogeneous assortment of luxuries procured with the
five-cent piece given him by the kind-hearted old Master.  But you need
not think I am going to tell you every time his popgun goes off, making a
Selah of him whenever I want to change the subject.  Occasionally he was
ill-timed in his artillery practice and ignominiously rebuked, sometimes
he was harmlessly playful and nobody minded him, but every now and then
he came in so apropos that I am morally certain he gets a hint from
somebody who watches the course of the conversation, and means through
him to have a hand in it and stop any of us when we are getting prosy.
But in consequence of That Boy's indiscretion, we were without a check
upon our expansiveness, and ran on in the way you have observed and may
be disposed to find fault with.

One other thing the Master said before we left the table, after our long
talk of that day.

--I have been tempted sometimes,--said he, to envy the immediate triumphs
of the singer.  He enjoys all that praise can do for him and at the very
moment of exerting his talent.  And the singing women! Once in a while,
in the course of my life, I have found myself in the midst of a tulip-bed
of full-dressed, handsome women in all their glory, and when some one
among them has shaken her gauzy wings, and sat down before the piano, and
then, only giving the keys a soft touch now and then to support her
voice, has warbled some sweet, sad melody intertwined with the longings
or regrets of some tender-hearted poet, it has seemed to me that so to
hush the rustling of the silks and silence the babble of the buds, as
they call the chicks of a new season, and light up the flame of romance
in cold hearts, in desolate ones, in old burnt-out ones,--like mine, I
was going to say, but I won't, for it isn't so, and you may laugh to hear
me say it isn't so, if you like,--was perhaps better than to be
remembered a few hundred years by a few perfect stanzas, when your
gravestone is standing aslant, and your name is covered over with a
lichen as big as a militia colonel's cockade, and nobody knows or cares
enough about you to scrape it off and set the tipsy old slate-stone
upright again.

--I said nothing in reply to this, for I was thinking of a sweet singer
to whose voice I had listened in its first freshness, and which is now
only an echo in my memory.  If any reader of the periodical in which
these conversations are recorded can remember so far back as the first
year of its publication, he will find among the papers contributed by a
friend not yet wholly forgotten a few verses, lively enough in their way,
headed "The Boys."  The sweet singer was one of this company of college
classmates, the constancy of whose friendship deserves a better tribute
than the annual offerings, kindly meant, as they are, which for many
years have not been wanting at their social gatherings.  The small
company counts many noted personages on its list, as is well known to
those who are interested in such local matters, but it is not known that
every fifth man of the whole number now living is more or less of a
poet,--using that word with a generous breadth of significance.  But it
should seem that the divine gift it implies is more freely dispensed than
some others, for while there are (or were, for one has taken his Last
Degree) eight musical quills, there was but one pair of lips which could
claim any special consecration to vocal melody.  Not that one that should
undervalue the half-recitative of doubtful barytones, or the brilliant
escapades of slightly unmanageable falsettos, or the concentrated efforts
of the proprietors of two or three effective notes, who may be observed
lying in wait for them, and coming down on them with all their might, and
the look on their countenances of "I too am a singer."  But the voice
that led all, and that all loved to listen to, the voice that was at once
full, rich, sweet, penetrating, expressive, whose ample overflow drowned
all the imperfections and made up for all the shortcomings of the others,
is silent henceforth forevermore for all earthly listeners.

And these were the lines that one of "The Boys," as they have always
called themselves for ever so many years, read at the first meeting after
the voice which had never failed them was hushed in the stillness of
death.

               J. A.

               1871.

     One memory trembles on our lips
     It throbs in every breast;
     In tear-dimmed eyes, in mirth's eclipse,
     The shadow stands confessed.

     O silent voice, that cheered so long
     Our manhood's marching day,
     Without thy breath of heavenly song,
     How weary seems the way!

     Vain every pictured phrase to tell
     Our sorrowing hearts' desire;
     The shattered harp, the broken shell,
     The silent unstrung lyre;

     For youth was round us while he sang;
     It glowed in every tone;
     With bridal chimes the echoes rang,
     And made the past our own.

     O blissful dream!  Our nursery joys
     We know must have an end,
     But love and friendships broken toys
     May God's good angels mend!

     The cheering smile, the voice of mirth
     And laughter's gay surprise
     That please the children born of earth,
     Why deem that Heaven denies?

     Methinks in that refulgent sphere
     That knows not sun or moon,
     An earth-born saint might long to hear
     One verse of "Bonny Doon";

     Or walking through the streets of gold
     In Heaven's unclouded light,
     His lips recall the song of old
     And hum "The sky is bright."

     And can we smile when thou art dead?
     Ah, brothers, even so!
     The rose of summer will be red,
     In spite of winter's snow.

     Thou wouldst not leave us all in gloom
     Because thy song is still,
     Nor blight the banquet-garland's bloom
     With grief's untimely chill.

     The sighing wintry winds complain,
     The singing bird has flown,
    --Hark! heard I not that ringing strain,
     That clear celestial tone?

     How poor these pallid phrases seem,
     How weak this tinkling line,
     As warbles through my waking dream
     That angel voice of thine!

     Thy requiem asks a sweeter lay;
     It falters on my tongue;
     For all we vainly strive to say,
     Thou shouldst thyself have sung!




V

I fear that I have done injustice in my conversation and my report of it
to a most worthy and promising young man whom I should be very sorry to
injure in any way.  Dr. Benjamin Franklin got hold of my account of my
visit to him, and complained that I had made too much of the expression
he used.  He did not mean to say that he thought I was suffering from the
rare disease he mentioned, but only that the color reminded him of it.
It was true that he had shown me various instruments, among them one for
exploring the state of a part by means of a puncture, but he did not
propose to make use of it upon my person.  In short, I had colored the
story so as to make him look ridiculous.

--I am afraid I did,--I said,--but was n't I colored myself so as to look
ridiculous?  I've heard it said that people with the jaundice see
everything yellow; perhaps I saw things looking a little queerly, with
that black and blue spot I could n't account for threatening to make a
colored man and brother of me.  But I am sorry if I have done you any
wrong.  I hope you won't lose any patients by my making a little fun of
your meters and scopes and contrivances.  They seem so odd to us outside
people.  Then the idea of being bronzed all over was such an alarming
suggestion.  But I did not mean to damage your business, which I trust is
now considerable, and I shall certainly come to you again if I have need
of the services of a physician. Only don't mention the names of any
diseases in English or Latin before me next time.  I dreamed about cutis
oenea half the night after I came to see you.

Dr. Benjamin took my apology very pleasantly.  He did not want to be
touchy about it, he said, but he had his way to make in the world, and
found it a little hard at first, as most young men did.  People were
afraid to trust them, no matter how much they knew.  One of the old
doctors asked him to come in and examine a patient's heart for him the
other day.  He went with him accordingly, and when they stood by the
bedside, he offered his stethoscope to the old doctor.  The old doctor
took it and put the wrong end to his ear and the other to the patient's
chest, and kept it there about two minutes, looking all the time as wise
as an old owl.  Then he, Dr. Benjamin, took it and applied it properly,
and made out where the trouble was in no time at all.  But what was the
use of a young man's pretending to know anything in the presence of an
old owl?  I saw by their looks, he said, that they all thought I used
the, stethoscope wrong end up, and was nothing but a 'prentice hand to
the old doctor.

--I am much pleased to say that since Dr. Benjamin has had charge of a
dispensary district, and been visiting forty or fifty patients a day, I
have reason to think he has grown a great deal more practical than when I
made my visit to his office.  I think I was probably one of his first
patients, and that he naturally made the most of me. But my second trial
was much more satisfactory.  I got an ugly cut from the carving-knife in
an affair with a goose of iron constitution in which I came off second
best.  I at once adjourned with Dr. Benjamin to his small office, and put
myself in his hands.  It was astonishing to see what a little experience
of miscellaneous practice had done for him.  He did not ask me anymore
questions about my hereditary predispositions on the paternal and
maternal sides.  He did not examine me with the stethoscope or the
laryngoscope.  He only strapped up my cut, and informed me that it would
speedily get well by the "first intention,"--an odd phrase enough, but
sounding much less formidable than cutis oenea.

I am afraid I have had something of the French prejudice which embodies
itself in the maxim "young surgeon, old physician."  But a young
physician who has been taught by great masters of the profession, in
ample hospitals, starts in his profession knowing more than some old
doctors have learned in a lifetime.  Give him a little time to get the
use of his wits in emergencies, and to know the little arts that do so
much for a patient's comfort,--just as you give a young sailor time to
get his sea-legs on and teach his stomach to behave itself,--and he will
do well enough.

The old Master knows ten times more about this matter and about all the
professions, as he does about everything else, than I do.  My opinion is
that he has studied two, if not three, of these professions in a regular
course.  I don't know that he has ever preached, except as Charles Lamb
said Coleridge always did, for when he gets the bit in his teeth he runs
away with the conversation, and if he only took a text his talk would be
a sermon; but if he has not preached, he has made a study of theology, as
many laymen do.  I know he has some shelves of medical books in his
library, and has ideas on the subject of the healing art.  He confesses
to having attended law lectures and having had much intercourse with
lawyers.  So he has something to say on almost any subject that happens
to come up.  I told him my story about my visit to the young doctor, and
asked him what he thought of youthful practitioners in general and of Dr.
Benjamin in particular.

I 'll tell you what,--the Master said,--I know something about these
young fellows that come home with their heads full of "science," as they
call it, and stick up their signs to tell people they know how to cure
their headaches and stomach-aches.  Science is a first-rate piece of
furniture for a man's upper chamber, if he has common sense on the
ground-floor.  But if a man has n't got plenty of good common sense, the
more science he has the worse for his patient.

--I don't know that I see exactly how it is worse for the patient,--I
said.

--Well, I'll tell you, and you'll find it's a mighty simple matter. When
a person is sick, there is always something to be done for him, and done
at once.  If it is only to open or shut a window, if it is only to tell
him to keep on doing just what he is doing already, it wants a man to
bring his mind right down to the fact of the present case and its
immediate needs.  Now the present case, as the doctor sees it, is just
exactly such a collection of paltry individual facts as never was
before,--a snarl and tangle of special conditions which it is his
business to wind as much thread out of as he can.  It is a good deal as
when a painter goes to take the portrait of any sitter who happens to
send for him.  He has seen just such noses and just such eyes and just
such mouths, but he never saw exactly such a face before, and his
business is with that and no other person's,--with the features of the
worthy father of a family before him, and not with the portraits he has
seen in galleries or books, or Mr. Copley's grand pictures of the fine
old Tories, or the Apollos and Jupiters of Greek sculpture.  It is the
same thing with the patient. His disease has features of its own; there
never was and never will be another case in all respects exactly like it.
If a doctor has science without common sense, he treats a fever, but not
this man's fever.  If he has common sense without science, he treats this
man's fever without knowing the general laws that govern all fevers and
all vital movements.  I 'll tell you what saves these last fellows.  They
go for weakness whenever they see it, with stimulants and strengtheners,
and they go for overaction, heat, and high pulse, and the rest, with
cooling and reducing remedies.  That is three quarters of medical
practice.  The other quarter wants science and common sense too.  But the
men that have science only, begin too far back, and, before they get as
far as the case in hand, the patient has very likely gone to visit his
deceased relatives.  You remember Thomas Prince's "Chronological History
of New England," I suppose?  He begins, you recollect, with Adam, and has
to work down five thousand six hundred and twenty-four years before he
gets to the Pilgrim fathers and the Mayflower.  It was all very well,
only it did n't belong there, but got in the way of something else.  So
it is with "science" out of place.  By far the larger part of the facts
of structure and function you find in the books of anatomy and physiology
have no immediate application to the daily duties of the practitioner.
You must learn systematically, for all that; it is the easiest way and
the only way that takes hold of the memory, except mere empirical
repetition, like that of the handicraftsman.  Did you ever see one of
those Japanese figures with the points for acupuncture marked upon it?

--I had to own that my schooling had left out that piece of information.

Well, I 'll tell you about it.  You see they have a way of pushing long,
slender needles into you for the cure of rheumatism and other complaints,
and it seems there is a choice of spots for the operation, though it is
very strange how little mischief it does in a good many places one would
think unsafe to meddle with.  So they had a doll made, and marked the
spots where they had put in needles without doing any harm.  They must
have had accidents from sticking the needles into the wrong places now
and then, but I suppose they did n't say a great deal about those.  After
a time, say a few centuries of experience, they had their doll all
spotted over with safe places for sticking in the needles.  That is their
way of registering practical knowledge: We, on the other hand, study the
structure of the body as a whole, systematically, and have no difficulty
at all in remembering the track of the great vessels and nerves, and
knowing just what tracks will be safe and what unsafe. It is just the
same thing with the geologists.  Here is a man close by us boring for
water through one of our ledges, because somebody else got water
somewhere else in that way; and a person who knows geology or ought to
know it, because he has given his life to it, tells me he might as well
bore there for lager-beer as for water.

--I thought we had had enough of this particular matter, and that I
should like to hear what the Master had to say about the three
professions he knew something about, each compared with the others.

What is your general estimate of doctors, lawyers, and ministers?--said
I.

--Wait a minute, till I have got through with your first question,--said
the Master.---One thing at a time.  You asked me about the young doctors,
and about our young doctor.  They come home tres biens chausses, as a
Frenchman would say, mighty well shod with professional knowledge.  But
when they begin walking round among their poor patients, they don't
commonly start with millionnaires,--they find that their new shoes of
scientific acquirements have got to be broken in just like a pair of
boots or brogans.  I don't know that I have put it quite strong enough.
Let me try again.  You've seen those fellows at the circus that get up on
horseback so big that you wonder how they could climb into the saddle.
But pretty soon they throw off their outside coat, and the next minute
another one, and then the one under that, and so they keep peeling off
one garment after another till people begin to look queer and think they
are going too far for strict propriety.  Well, that is the way a fellow
with a real practical turn serves a good many of his scientific wrappers,
flings 'em off for other people to pick up, and goes right at the work of
curing stomach-aches and all the other little mean unscientific
complaints that make up the larger part of every doctor's business.  I
think our Dr. Benjamin is a worthy young man, and if you are in need of a
doctor at any time I hope you will go to him; and if you come off without
harm, I will recommend some other friend to try him.

--I thought he was going to say he would try him in his own person, but
the Master is not fond of committing himself.

Now, I will answer your other question, he said.  The lawyers are the
cleverest men, the ministers are the most learned, and the doctors are
the most sensible.

The lawyers are a picked lot, "first scholars" and the like, but their
business is as unsympathetic as Jack Ketch's.  There is nothing
humanizing in their relations with their fellow-creatures.  They go for
the side that retains them.  They defend the man they know to be a rogue,
and not very rarely throw suspicion on the man they know to be innocent.
Mind you, I am not finding fault with them; every side of a case has a
right to the best statement it admits of; but I say it does not tend to
make them sympathetic.  Suppose in a case of Fever vs. Patient, the
doctor should side with either party according to whether the old miser
or his expectant heir was his employer. Suppose the minister should side
with the Lord or the Devil, according to the salary offered and other
incidental advantages, where the soul of a sinner was in question.  You
can see what a piece of work it would make of their sympathies.  But the
lawyers are quicker witted than either of the other professions, and
abler men generally.  They are good-natured, or, if they quarrel, their
quarrels are above-board.  I don't think they are as accomplished as the
ministers, but they have a way of cramming with special knowledge for a
case which leaves a certain shallow sediment of intelligence in their
memories about a good many things.  They are apt to talk law in mixed
company, and they have a way of looking round when they make a point, as
if they were addressing a jury, that is mighty aggravating, as I once had
occasion to see when one of 'em, and a pretty famous one, put me on the
witness-stand at a dinner-party once.

The ministers come next in point of talent.  They are far more curious
and widely interested outside of their own calling than either of the
other professions.  I like to talk with 'em.  They are interesting men,
full of good feelings, hard workers, always foremost in good deeds, and
on the whole the most efficient civilizing class, working downwards from
knowledge to ignorance, that is,--not so much upwards, perhaps,--that we
have.  The trouble is, that so many of 'em work in harness, and it is
pretty sure to chafe somewhere.  They feed us on canned meats mostly.
They cripple our instincts and reason, and give us a crutch of doctrine.
I have talked with a great many of 'em of all sorts of belief, and I
don't think they are quite so easy in their minds, the greater number of
them; nor so clear in their convictions, as one would think to hear 'em
lay down the law in the pulpit.  They used to lead the intelligence of
their parishes; now they do pretty well if they keep up with it, and they
are very apt to lag behind it.  Then they must have a colleague.  The old
minister thinks he can hold to his old course, sailing right into the
wind's eye of human nature, as straight as that famous old skipper John
Bunyan; the young minister falls off three or four points and catches the
breeze that left the old man's sails all shivering.  By and by the
congregation will get ahead of him, and then it must, have another new
skipper.  The priest holds his own pretty well; the minister is coming
down every generation nearer and nearer to the common level of the useful
citizen,--no oracle at all, but a man of more than average moral
instincts, who, if he knows anything, knows how little he knows.  The
ministers are good talkers, only the struggle between nature and grace
makes some of 'em a little awkward occasionally.  The women do their best
to spoil 'em, as they do the poets; you find it very pleasant to be
spoiled, no doubt; so do they. Now and then one of 'em goes over the dam;
no wonder, they're always in the rapids.

By this time our three ladies had their faces all turned toward the
speaker, like the weathercocks in a northeaster, and I thought it best to
switch off the talk on to another rail.

How about the doctors?--I said.

--Theirs is the least learned of the professions, in this country at
least.  They have not half the general culture of the lawyers, nor a
quarter of that of the ministers.  I rather think, though, they are more
agreeable to the common run of people than the men with black coats or
the men with green bags.  People can swear before 'em if they want to,
and they can't very well before ministers.  I don't care whether they
want to swear or not, they don't want to be on their good behavior.
Besides, the minister has a little smack of the sexton about him; he
comes when people are in extremis, but they don't send for him every time
they make a slight moral slip, tell a lie for instance, or smuggle a silk
dress through the customhouse; but they call in the doctor when a child
is cutting a tooth or gets a splinter in its finger.  So it does n't mean
much to send for him, only a pleasant chat about the news of the day; for
putting the baby to rights does n't take long.  Besides, everybody does
n't like to talk about the next world; people are modest in their
desires, and find this world as good as they deserve; but everybody loves
to talk physic.  Everybody loves to hear of strange cases; people are
eager to tell the doctor of the wonderful cures they have heard of; they
want to know what is the matter with somebody or other who is said to be
suffering from "a complication of diseases," and above all to get a hard
name, Greek or Latin, for some complaint which sounds altogether too
commonplace in plain English.  If you will only call a headache a
Cephalgia, it acquires dignity at once, and a patient becomes rather
proud of it.  So I think doctors are generally welcome in most companies.

In old times, when people were more afraid of the Devil and of witches
than they are now, they liked to have a priest or a minister somewhere
near to scare 'em off; but nowadays, if you could find an old woman that
would ride round the room on a broomstick, Barnum would build an
amphitheatre to exhibit her in; and if he could come across a young imp,
with hoofs, tail, and budding horns, a lineal descendant of one of those
"daemons" which the good people of Gloucester fired at, and were fired at
by "for the best part of a month together" in the year 1692, the, great
showman would have him at any cost for his museum or menagerie.  Men are
cowards, sir, and are driven by fear as the sovereign motive.  Men are
idolaters, and want something to look at and kiss and hug, or throw
themselves down before; they always did, they always will; and if you
don't make it of wood, you must make it of words, which are just as much
used for idols as promissory notes are used for values.  The ministers
have a hard time of it without bell and book and holy water; they are
dismounted men in armor since Luther cut their saddle-girths, and you can
see they are quietly taking off one piece of iron after another until
some of the best of 'em are fighting the devil (not the zoological Devil
with the big D) with the sword of the Spirit, and precious little else in
the way of weapons of offence or defence. But we couldn't get on without
the spiritual brotherhood, whatever became of our special creeds.  There
is a genius for religion, just as there is for painting or sculpture.  It
is half-sister to the genius for music, and has some of the features
which remind us of earthly love.  But it lifts us all by its mere
presence.  To see a good man and hear his voice once a week would be
reason enough for building churches and pulpits.  The Master stopped all
at once, and after about half a minute laughed his pleasant laugh.

What is it?--I asked him.

I was thinking of the great coach and team that is carrying us fast
enough, I don't know but too fast, somewhere or other.  The D. D.'s used
to be the leaders, but now they are the wheel-horses.  It's pretty hard
to tell how much they pull, but we know they can hold back like the----

--When we're going down hill,--I said, as neatly as if I had been a
High-Church curate trained to snap at the last word of the response, so
that you couldn't wedge in the tail of a comma between the end of the
congregation's closing syllable and the beginning of the next petition.
They do it well, but it always spoils my devotion.  To save my life, I
can't help watching them, as I watch to see a duck dive at the flash of a
gun, and that is not what I go to church for. It is a juggler's trick,
and there is no more religion in it than in catching a ball on the fly.

I was looking at our Scheherezade the other day, and thinking what a pity
it was that she had never had fair play in the world.  I wish I knew more
of her history.  There is one way of learning it,--making love to her.  I
wonder whether she would let me and like it.  It is an absurd thing, and
I ought not to confess, but I tell you and you only, Beloved, my heart
gave a perceptible jump when it heard the whisper of that possibility
overhead!  Every day has its ebb and flow, but such a thought as that is
like one of those tidal waves they talk about, that rolls in like a great
wall and overtops and drowns out all your landmarks, and you, too, if you
don't mind what you are about and stand ready to run or climb or swim.
Not quite so bad as that, though, this time.  I take an interest in our
Scheherezade.  I am glad she did n't smile on the pipe and the
Bohemian-looking fellow that finds the best part of his life in sucking
at it.  A fine thing, isn't it; for a young woman to marry a man who will
hold her

   "Something better than his dog, a little dearer than his horse,"

but not quite so good as his meerschaum?  It is n't for me to throw
stones, though, who have been a Nicotian a good deal more than half my
days.  Cigar-stump out now, and consequently have become very bitter on
more persevering sinners.  I say I take an interest in our Scheherezade,
but I rather think it is more paternal than anything else, though my
heart did give that jump.  It has jumped a good many times without
anything very remarkable coming of it.

This visit to the Observatory is going to bring us all, or most of us,
together in a new way, and it wouldn't be very odd if some of us should
become better acquainted than we ever have been.  There is a chance for
the elective affinities.  What tremendous forces they are, if two
subjects of them come within range!  There lies a bit of iron. All the
dynamic agencies of the universe are pledged to hold it just in that
position, and there it will lie until it becomes a heap of red-brown
rust.  But see, I hold a magnet to it,--it looks to you like just such a
bit of iron as the other,--and lo! it leaves them all,--the tugging of
the mighty earth; of the ghostly moon that walks in white, trailing the
snaky waves of the ocean after her; of the awful sun, twice as large as a
sphere that the whole orbit of the moon would but just girdle,--it leaves
the wrestling of all their forces, which are at a dead lock with each
other, all fighting for it, and springs straight to the magnet.  What a
lucky thing it is for well-conducted persons that the maddening elective
affinities don't come into play in full force very often!

I suppose I am making a good deal more of our prospective visit than it
deserves.  It must be because I have got it into my head that we are
bound to have some kind of sentimental outbreak amongst us, and that this
will give a chance for advances on the part of anybody disposed in that
direction.  A little change of circumstance often hastens on a movement
that has been long in preparation.  A chemist will show you a flask
containing a clear liquid; he will give it a shake or two, and the whole
contents of the flask will become solid in an instant.  Or you may lay a
little heap of iron-filings on a sheet of paper with a magnet beneath it,
and they will be quiet enough as they are, but give the paper a slight
jar and the specks of metal will suddenly find their way to the north or
the south pole of the magnet and take a definite shape not unpleasing to
contemplate, and curiously illustrating the laws of attraction,
antagonism, and average, by which the worlds, conscious and unconscious,
are alike governed.  So with our little party, with any little party of
persons who have got used to each other; leave them undisturbed and they
might remain in a state of equilibrium forever; but let anything give
them a shake or a jar, and the long-striving but hindered affinities come
all at once into play and finish the work of a year in five minutes.

We were all a good deal excited by the anticipation of this visit. The
Capitalist, who for the most part keeps entirely to himself, seemed to
take an interest in it and joined the group in the parlor who were making
arrangements as to the details of the eventful expedition, which was very
soon to take place.  The Young Girl was full of enthusiasm; she is one of
those young persons, I think, who are impressible, and of necessity
depressible when their nervous systems are overtasked, but elastic,
recovering easily from mental worries and fatigues, and only wanting a
little change of their conditions to get back their bloom and
cheerfulness.  I could not help being pleased to see how much of the
child was left in her, after all the drudgery she had been through.  What
is there that youth will not endure and triumph over?  Here she was; her
story for the week was done in good season; she had got rid of her
villain by a new and original catastrophe; she had received a sum of
money for an extra string of verses,--painfully small, it is true, but it
would buy her a certain ribbon she wanted for the great excursion; and
now her eyes sparkled so that I forgot how tired and hollow they
sometimes looked when she had been sitting up half the night over her
endless manuscript.

The morning of the day we had looked forward to--promised as good an
evening as we could wish.  The Capitalist, whose courteous and bland
demeanor would never have suggested the thought that he was a robber and
an enemy of his race, who was to be trampled underfoot by the beneficent
regenerators of the social order as preliminary to the universal reign of
peace on earth and good-will to men, astonished us all with a proposal to
escort the three ladies and procure a carriage for their conveyance.  The
Lady thanked him in a very cordial way, but said she thought nothing of
the walk.  The Landlady looked disappointed at this answer.  For her part
she was on her legs all day and should be glad enough to ride, if so be
he was going to have a carriage at any rate.  It would be a sight
pleasanter than to trudge afoot, but she would n't have him go to the
expense on her account.  Don't mention it, madam,--r--said the
Capitalist, in a generous glow of enthusiasm.  As for the Young Girl, she
did not often get a chance for a drive, and liked the idea of it for its
own sake, as children do, and she insisted that the Lady should go in the
carriage with her.  So it was settled that the Capitalist should take the
three ladies in a carriage, and the rest of us go on foot.

The evening behaved as it was bound to do on so momentous an occasion.
The Capitalist was dressed with almost suspicious nicety. We pedestrians
could not help waiting to see them off, and I thought he handed the
ladies into the carriage with the air of a French marquis.

I walked with Dr. Benjamin and That Boy, and we had to keep the little
imp on the trot a good deal of the way in order not to be too long behind
the carriage party.  The Member of the Haouse walked with our two
dummies,--I beg their pardon, I mean the Register of Deeds and the
Salesman.

The Man of Letters, hypothetically so called, walked by himself, smoking
a short pipe which was very far from suggesting the spicy breezes that
blow soft from Ceylon's isle.

I suppose everybody who reads this paper has visited one or more
observatories, and of course knows all about them.  But as it may
hereafter be translated into some foreign tongue and circulated among
barbarous, but rapidly improving people, people who have as yet no
astronomers among them, it may be well to give a little notion of what
kind of place an observatory is.

To begin then: a deep and solid stone foundation is laid in the earth,
and a massive pier of masonry is built up on it.  A heavy block of
granite forms the summit of this pier, and on this block rests the
equatorial telescope.  Around this structure a circular tower is built,
with two or more floors which come close up to the pier, but do not touch
it at any point.  It is crowned with a hemispherical dome, which, I may
remark, half realizes the idea of my egg-shell studio.  This dome is
cleft from its base to its summit by a narrow, ribbon-like opening,
through which is seen the naked sky. It revolves on cannon-balls, so
easily that a single hand can move it, and thus the opening may be turned
towards any point of the compass.  As the telescope can be raised or
depressed so as to be directed to any elevation from the horizon to the
zenith, and turned around the entire circle with the dome, it can be
pointed to any part of the heavens.  But as the star or other celestial
object is always apparently moving, in consequence of the real rotatory
movement of the earth, the telescope is made to follow it automatically
by an ingenious clock-work arrangement.  No place, short of the temple of
the living God, can be more solemn.  The jars of the restless life around
it do not disturb the serene intelligence of the half-reasoning
apparatus.  Nothing can stir the massive pier but the shocks that shake
the solid earth itself.  When an earthquake thrills the planet, the
massive turret shudders with the shuddering rocks on which it rests, but
it pays no heed to the wildest tempest, and while the heavens are
convulsed and shut from the eye of the far-seeing instrument it waits
without a tremor for the blue sky to come back. It is the type of the
true and steadfast man of the Roman poet, whose soul remains unmoved
while the firmament cracks and tumbles about him.  It is the material
image of the Christian; his heart resting on the Rock of Ages, his eye
fixed on the brighter world above.

I did not say all this while we were looking round among these wonders,
quite new to many of us.  People don't talk in straight-off sentences
like that.  They stumble and stop, or get interrupted, change a word,
begin again, miss connections of verbs and nouns, and so on, till they
blunder out their meaning.  But I did let fall a word or two, showing the
impression the celestial laboratory produced upon me.  I rather think I
must own to the "Rock of Ages" comparison. Thereupon the "Man of
Letters," so called, took his pipe from his mouth, and said that he did
n't go in "for sentiment and that sort of thing.  Gush was played out."

The Member of the Haouse, who, as I think, is not wanting in that homely
good sense which one often finds in plain people from the huckleberry
districts, but who evidently supposes the last speaker to be what he
calls "a tahlented mahn," looked a little puzzled.  My remark seemed
natural and harmless enough to him, I suppose, but I had been distinctly
snubbed, and the Member of the Haouse thought I must defend myself, as is
customary in the deliberative body to which he belongs, when one
gentleman accuses another gentleman of mental weakness or obliquity.  I
could not make up my mind to oblige him at that moment by showing fight.
I suppose that would have pleased my assailant, as I don't think he has a
great deal to lose, and might have made a little capital out of me if he
could have got a laugh out of the Member or either of the dummies,--I beg
their pardon again, I mean the two undemonstrative boarders.  But I will
tell you, Beloved, just what I think about this matter.

We poets, you know, are much given to indulging in sentiment, which is a
mode of consciousness at a discount just now with the new generation of
analysts who are throwing everything into their crucibles.  Now we must
not claim too much for sentiment.  It does not go a great way in deciding
questions of arithmetic, or algebra, or geometry.  Two and two will
undoubtedly make four, irrespective of the emotions or other
idiosyncrasies of the calculator; and the three angles of a triangle
insist on being equal to two right angles, in the face of the most
impassioned rhetoric or the most inspired verse. But inasmuch as religion
and law and the whole social order of civilized society, to say nothing
of literature and art, are so founded on and pervaded by sentiment that
they would all go to pieces without it, it is a word not to be used too
lightly in passing judgment, as if it were an element to be thrown out or
treated with small consideration.  Reason may be the lever, but sentiment
gives you the fulcrum and the place to stand on if you want to move the
world.  Even "sentimentality," which is sentiment overdone, is better
than that affectation of superiority to human weakness which is only
tolerable as one of the stage properties of full-blown dandyism, and is,
at best, but half-blown cynicism; which participle and noun you can
translate, if you happen to remember the derivation of the last of them,
by a single familiar word.  There is a great deal of false sentiment in
the world, as there is of bad logic and erroneous doctrine; but--it is
very much less disagreeable to hear a young poet overdo his emotions, or
even deceive himself about them, than to hear a caustic-epithet flinger
repeating such words as "sentimentality" and "entusymusy,"--one of the
least admirable of Lord Byron's bequests to our language,--for the
purpose of ridiculing him into silence.  An overdressed woman is not so
pleasing as she might be, but at any rate she is better than the oil of
vitriol squirter, whose profession it is to teach young ladies to avoid
vanity by spoiling their showy silks and satins.

The Lady was the first of our party who was invited to look through the
equatorial.  Perhaps this world had proved so hard to her that she was
pained to think that other worlds existed, to be homes of suffering and
sorrow.  Perhaps she was thinking it would be a happy change when she
should leave this dark planet for one of those brighter spheres.  She
sighed, at any rate, but thanked the Young Astronomer for the beautiful
sights he had shown her, and gave way to the next comer, who was That
Boy, now in a state of irrepressible enthusiasm to see the Man in the
Moon.  He was greatly disappointed at not making out a colossal human
figure moving round among the shining summits and shadowy ravines of the
"spotty globe."

The Landlady came next and wished to see the moon also, in preference to
any other object.  She was astonished at the revelations of the powerful
telescope.  Was there any live creatures to be seen on the moon? she
asked.  The Young Astronomer shook his head, smiling a little at the
question.--Was there any meet'n'-houses?  There was no evidence, he said,
that the moon was inhabited.  As there did not seem to be either air or
water on its surface, the inhabitants would have a rather hard time of
it, and if they went to meeting the sermons would be apt to be rather
dry.  If there were a building on it as big as York minster, as big as
the Boston Coliseum, the great telescopes like Lord Rosse's would make it
out.  But it seemed to be a forlorn place; those who had studied it most
agreed in considering it a "cold, crude, silent, and desolate" ruin of
nature, without the possibility, if life were on it, of articulate
speech, of music, even of sound.  Sometimes a greenish tint was seen upon
its surface, which might have been taken for vegetation, but it was
thought not improbably to be a reflection from the vast forests of South
America. The ancients had a fancy, some of them, that the face of the
moon was a mirror in which the seas and shores of the earth were imaged.
Now we know the geography of the side toward us about as well as that of
Asia, better than that of Africa.  The Astronomer showed them one of the
common small photographs of the moon.  He assured them that he had
received letters inquiring in all seriousness if these alleged lunar
photographs were not really taken from a peeled orange.  People had got
angry with him for laughing at them for asking such a question.  Then he
gave them an account of the famous moon-hoax which came out, he believed,
in 1835.  It was full of the most bare-faced absurdities, yet people
swallowed it all, and even Arago is said to have treated it seriously as
a thing that could not well be true, for Mr. Herschel would have
certainly notified him of these marvellous discoveries.  The writer of it
had not troubled himself to invent probabilities, but had borrowed his
scenery from the Arabian Nights and his lunar inhabitants from Peter
Wilkins.

After this lecture the Capitalist stepped forward and applied his eye to
the lens.  I suspect it to have been shut most of the time, for I observe
a good many elderly people adjust the organ of vision to any optical
instrument in that way.  I suppose it is from the instinct of protection
to the eye, the same instinct as that which makes the raw militia-man
close it when he pulls the, trigger of his musket the first time.  He
expressed himself highly gratified, however, with what he saw, and
retired from the instrument to make room for the Young Girl.

She threw her hair back and took her position at the instrument. Saint
Simeon Stylites the Younger explained the wonders of the moon to
her,--Tycho and the grooves radiating from it, Kepler and Copernicus with
their craters and ridges, and all the most brilliant shows of this
wonderful little world.  I thought he was more diffuse and more
enthusiastic in his descriptions than he had been with the older members
of the party.  I don't doubt the old gentleman who lived so long on the
top of his pillar would have kept a pretty sinner (if he could have had
an elevator to hoist her up to him) longer than he would have kept her
grandmother.  These young people are so ignorant, you know.  As for our
Scheherezade, her delight was unbounded, and her curiosity insatiable.
If there were any living creatures there, what odd things they must be.
They could n't have any lungs, nor any hearts.  What a pity!  Did they
ever die?  How could they expire if they didn't breathe?  Burn up?  No
air to burn in.  Tumble into some of those horrid pits, perhaps, and
break all to bits.  She wondered how the young people there liked it, or
whether there were any young people there; perhaps nobody was young and
nobody was old, but they were like mummies all of them--what an idea
--two mummies making love to each other!  So she went on in a rattling,
giddy kind of way, for she was excited by the strange scene in which she
found herself, and quite astonished the Young Astronomer with her
vivacity.  All at once she turned to him.

Will you show me the double star you said I should see?

With the greatest pleasure,--he said, and proceeded to wheel the
ponderous dome, and then to adjust the instrument, I think to the one in
Andromeda, or that in Cygnus, but I should not know one of them from the
other.

How beautiful!--she said as she looked at the wonderful object.---One is
orange red and one is emerald green.

The young man made an explanation in which he said something about
complementary colors.

Goodness!--exclaimed the Landlady.---What! complimentary to our party?

Her wits must have been a good deal confused by the strange sights of the
evening.  She had seen tickets marked complimentary, she remembered, but
she could not for the life of her understand why our party should be
particularly favored at a celestial exhibition like this.  On the whole,
she questioned inwardly whether it might not be some subtle pleasantry,
and smiled, experimentally, with a note of interrogation in the smile,
but, finding no encouragement, allowed her features to subside gradually
as if nothing had happened.  I saw all this as plainly as if it had all
been printed in great-primer type, instead of working itself out in her
features.  I like to see other people muddled now and then, because my
own occasional dulness is relieved by a good solid background of
stupidity in my neighbors.

--And the two revolve round each other?--said the Young Girl.

--Yes,--he answered,--two suns, a greater and a less, each shining, but
with a different light, for the other.

--How charming!  It must be so much pleasanter than to be alone in such a
great empty space!  I should think one would hardly care to shine if its
light wasted itself in the monstrous solitude of the sky.  Does not a
single star seem very lonely to you up there?

--Not more lonely than I am myself,--answered the Young Astronomer.

--I don't know what there was in those few words, but I noticed that for
a minute or two after they, were uttered I heard the ticking of the
clock-work that moved the telescope as clearly as if we had all been
holding our breath, and listening for the music of the spheres.

The Young Girl kept her eye closely applied to the eye-piece of the
telescope a very long time, it seemed to me.  Those double stars
interested her a good deal, no doubt.  When she looked off from the glass
I thought both her eyes appeared very much as if they had been a little
strained, for they were suffused and glistening.  It may be that she
pitied the lonely young man.

I know nothing in the world tenderer than the pity that a kind-hearted
young girl has for a young man who feels lonely.  It is true that these
dear creatures are all compassion for every form of human woe, and
anxious to alleviate all human misfortunes.  They will go to
Sunday-schools through storms their brothers are afraid of, to teach the
most unpleasant and intractable classes of little children the age of
Methuselah and the dimensions of Og the King of Bashan's bedstead.  They
will stand behind a table at a fair all day until they are ready to drop,
dressed in their prettiest clothes and their sweetest smiles, and lay
hands upon you, like--so many Lady Potiphars,--perfectly correct ones, of
course,--to make you buy what you do not want, at prices which you cannot
afford; all this as cheerfully as if it were not martyrdom to them as
well as to you. Such is their love for all good objects, such their
eagerness to sympathize with all their suffering fellow-creatures!  But
there is nothing they pity as they pity a lonely young man.

I am sure, I sympathize with her in this instance.  To see a pale student
burning away, like his own midnight lamp, with only dead men's hands to
hold, stretched out to him from the sepulchres of books, and dead men's
souls imploring him from their tablets to warm them over again just for a
little while in a human consciousness, when all this time there are soft,
warm, living hands that would ask nothing better than to bring the blood
back into those cold thin fingers, and gently caressing natures that
would wind all their tendrils about the unawakened heart which knows so
little of itself, is pitiable enough and would be sadder still if we did
not have the feeling that sooner or later the pale student will be pretty
sure to feel the breath of a young girl against his cheek as she looks
over his shoulder; and that he will come all at once to an illuminated
page in his book that never writer traced in characters, and never
printer set up in type, and never binder enclosed within his covers! But
our young man seems farther away from life than any student whose head is
bent downwards over his books.  His eyes are turned away from all human
things.  How cold the moonlight is that falls upon his forehead, and how
white he looks in it!  Will not the rays strike through to his brain at
last, and send him to a narrower cell than this egg-shell dome which is
his workshop and his prison?

I cannot say that the Young Astronomer seemed particularly impressed with
a sense of his miserable condition.  He said he was lonely, it is true,
but he said it in a manly tone, and not as if he were repining at the
inevitable condition of his devoting himself to that particular branch of
science.  Of course, he is lonely, the most lonely being that lives in
the midst of our breathing world.  If he would only stay a little longer
with us when we get talking; but he is busy almost always either in
observation or with his calculations and studies, and when the nights are
fair loses so much sleep that he must make it up by day.  He wants
contact with human beings.  I wish he would change his seat and come
round and sit by our Scheherezade!

The rest of the visit went off well enough, except that the "Man of
Letters," so called, rather snubbed some of the heavenly bodies as not
quite up to his standard of brilliancy.  I thought myself that the
double-star episode was the best part of it.

I have an unexpected revelation to make to the reader.  Not long after
our visit to the Observatory, the Young Astronomer put a package into my
hands, a manuscript, evidently, which he said he would like to have me
glance over.  I found something in it which interested me, and told him
the next day that I should like to read it with some care.  He seemed
rather pleased at this, and said that he wished I would criticise it as
roughly as I liked, and if I saw anything in it which might be dressed to
better advantage to treat it freely, just as if it were my own
production.  It had often happened to him, he went on to say, to be
interrupted in his observations by clouds covering the objects he was
examining for a longer or shorter time.  In these idle moments he had put
down many thoughts, unskilfully he feared, but just as they came into his
mind.  His blank verse he suspected was often faulty.  His thoughts he
knew must be crude, many of them.  It would please him to have me amuse
myself by putting them into shape.  He was kind enough to say that I was
an artist in words, but he held himself as an unskilled apprentice.

I confess I was appalled when I cast my eye upon the title of the
manuscript, "Cirri and Nebulae."

--Oh! oh!--I said,--that will never do.  People don't know what Cirri
are, at least not one out of fifty readers.  "Wind-Clouds and
Star-Drifts" will do better than that.

--Anything you like,--he answered,--what difference does it make how you
christen a foundling?  These are not my legitimate scientific offspring,
and you may consider them left on your doorstep.

--I will not attempt to say just how much of the diction of these lines
belongs to him, and how much to me.  He said he would never claim them,
after I read them to him in my version.  I, on my part, do not wish to be
held responsible for some of his more daring thoughts, if I should see
fit to reproduce them hereafter.  At this time I shall give only the
first part of the series of poetical outbreaks for which the young
devotee of science must claim his share of the responsibility.  I may put
some more passages into shape by and by.

          WIND-CLOUDS AND STAR-DRIFTS.

                    I

     Another clouded night; the stars are hid,
     The orb that waits my search is hid with them.
     Patience!  Why grudge an hour, a month, a year,
     To plant my ladder and to gain the round
     That leads my footsteps to the heaven of fame,
     Where waits the wreath my sleepless midnights won?
     Not the stained laurel such as heroes wear
     That withers when some stronger conqueror's heel
     Treads down their shrivelling trophies in the dust;
     But the fair garland whose undying green
     Not time can change, nor wrath of gods or men!

     With quickened heart-beats I shall hear the tongues
     That speak my praise; but better far the sense
     That in the unshaped ages, buried deep
     In the dark mines of unaccomplished time
     Yet to be stamped with morning's royal die
     And coined in golden days,--in those dim years
     I shall be reckoned with the undying dead,
     My name emblazoned on the fiery arch,
     Unfading till the stars themselves shall fade.
     Then, as they call the roll of shining worlds,
     Sages of race unborn in accents new
     Shall count me with the Olympian ones of old,
     Whose glories kindle through the midnight sky
     Here glows the God of Battles; this recalls
     The Lord of Ocean, and yon far-off sphere
     The Sire of Him who gave his ancient name
     To the dim planet with the wondrous rings;
     Here flames the Queen of Beauty's silver lamp,
     And there the moon-girt orb of mighty Jove;
     But this, unseen through all earth's aeons past,
     A youth who watched beneath the western star
     Sought in the darkness, found, and showed to men;
     Linked with his name thenceforth and evermore!
     So shall that name be syllabled anew
     In all the tongues of all the tribes of men:
     I that have been through immemorial years
     Dust in the dust of my forgotten time
     Shall live in accents shaped of blood-warm breath,
     Yea, rise in mortal semblance, newly born
     In shining stone, in undecaying bronze,
     And stand on high, and look serenely down
     On the new race that calls the earth its own.

     Is this a cloud, that, blown athwart my soul,
     Wears a false seeming of the pearly stain
     Where worlds beyond the world their mingling rays
     Blend in soft white,--a cloud that, born of earth,
     Would cheat the soul that looks for light from heaven?
     Must every coral-insect leave his sign
     On each poor grain he lent to build the reef,
     As Babel's builders stamped their sunburnt clay,
     Or deem his patient service all in vain?
     What if another sit beneath the shade
     Of the broad elm I planted by the way,
    --What if another heed the beacon light
     I set upon the rock that wrecked my keel,
     Have I not done my task and served my kind?
     Nay, rather act thy part, unnamed, unknown,
     And let Fame blow her trumpet through the world
     With noisy wind to swell a fool's renown,
     Joined with some truth be stumbled blindly o'er,
     Or coupled with some single shining deed
     That in the great account of all his days
     Will stand alone upon the bankrupt sheet
     His pitying angel shows the clerk of Heaven.
     The noblest service comes from nameless hands,
     And the best servant does his work unseen.
     Who found the seeds of fire and made them shoot,
     Fed by his breath, in buds and flowers of flame?
     Who forged in roaring flames the ponderous stone,
     And shaped the moulded metal to his need?
     Who gave the dragging car its rolling wheel,
     And tamed the steed that whirls its circling round?
     All these have left their work and not their names,
     Why should I murmur at a fate like theirs?
     This is the heavenly light; the pearly stain
     Was but a wind-cloud drifting oer the stars!




VI

I find I have so many things in common with the old Master of Arts, that
I do not always know whether a thought was originally his or mine.  That
is what always happens where two persons of a similar cast of mind talk
much together.  And both of them often gain by the interchange.  Many
ideas grow better when transplanted into another mind than in the one
where they sprang up.  That which was a weed in one intelligence becomes
a flower in the other.  A flower, on the other hand, may dwindle down to
a mere weed by the same change. Healthy growths may become poisonous by
falling upon the wrong mental soil, and what seemed a night-shade in one
mind unfold as a morning-glory in the other.

--I thank God,--the Master said,--that a great many people believe a
great deal more than I do.  I think, when it comes to serious matters, I
like those who believe more than I do better than those who believe less.

--Why,--said I,--you have got hold of one of my own working axioms. I
should like to hear you develop it.

The Member of the Haouse said he should be glad to listen to the debate.
The gentleman had the floor.  The Scarabee rose from his chair and
departed;--I thought his joints creaked as he straightened himself.

The Young Girl made a slight movement; it was a purely accidental
coincidence, no doubt, but I saw That Boy put his hand in his pocket and
pull out his popgun, and begin loading it.  It cannot be that our
Scheherezade, who looks so quiet and proper at the table, can make use of
That Boy and his catapult to control the course of conversation and
change it to suit herself!  She certainly looks innocent enough; but what
does a blush prove, and what does its absence prove, on one of these
innocent faces?  There is nothing in all this world that can lie and
cheat like the face and the tongue of a young girl.  Just give her a
little touch of hysteria,--I don't mean enough of it to make her friends
call the doctor in, but a slight hint of it in the nervous system,--and
"Machiavel the waiting-maid" might take lessons of her.  But I cannot
think our Scheherezade is one of that kind, and I am ashamed of myself
for noting such a trifling coincidence as that which excited my
suspicion.

--I say,--the Master continued,--that I had rather be in the company of
those who believe more than I do, in spiritual matters at least, than of
those who doubt what I accept as a part of my belief.

--To tell the truth,--said I,--I find that difficulty sometimes in
talking with you.  You have not quite so many hesitations as I have in
following out your logical conclusions.  I suppose you would bring some
things out into daylight questioning that I had rather leave in that
twilight of half-belief peopled with shadows--if they are only
shadows--more sacred to me than many realities.

There is nothing I do not question,--said the Master;--I not only begin
with the precept of Descartes, but I hold all my opinions involving any
chain of reasoning always open to revision.

--I confess that I smiled internally to hear him say that.  The old
Master thinks he is open to conviction on all subjects; but if you meddle
with some of his notions and don't get tossed on his horns as if a bull
had hold of you, I should call you lucky.

--You don't mean you doubt everything?--I said.

--What do you think I question everything for, the Master replied,--if I
never get any answers?  You've seen a blind man with a stick, feeling his
way along?  Well, I am a blind man with a stick, and I find the world
pretty full of men just as blind as I am, but without any stick.  I try
the ground to find out whether it is firm or not before I rest my weight
on it; but after it has borne my weight, that question at least is
answered.  It very certainly was strong enough once; the presumption is
that it is strong enough now.  Still the soil may have been undermined,
or I may have grown heavier.  Make as much of that as you will.  I say I
question everything; but if I find Bunker Hill Monument standing as
straight as when I leaned against it a year or ten years ago, I am not
very much afraid that Bunker Hill will cave in if I trust myself again on
the soil of it.

I glanced off, as one often does in talk.

The Monument is an awful place to visit,--I said.---The waves of time are
like the waves of the ocean; the only thing they beat against without
destroying it is a rock; and they destroy that at last.  But it takes a
good while.  There is a stone now standing in very good order that was as
old as a monument of Louis XIV. and Queen Anne's day is now when Joseph
went down into Egypt.  Think of the shaft on Bunker Hill standing in the
sunshine on the morning of January 1st in the year 5872!

It won't be standing,--the Master said.---We are poor bunglers compared
to those old Egyptians.  There are no joints in one of their obelisks.
They are our masters in more ways than we know of, and in more ways than
some of us are willing to know.  That old Lawgiver wasn't learned in all
the wisdom of the Egyptians for nothing.  It scared people well a couple
of hundred years ago when Sir John Marsham and Dr. John Spencer ventured
to tell their stories about the sacred ceremonies of the Egyptian
priesthood.  People are beginning to find out now that you can't study
any religion by itself to any good purpose.  You must have comparative
theology as you have comparative anatomy.  What would you make of a cat's
foolish little good-for-nothing collar-bone, if you did not know how the
same bone means a good deal in other creatures,--in yourself, for
instance, as you 'll find out if you break it?  You can't know too much
of your race and its beliefs, if you want to know anything about your
Maker. I never found but one sect large enough to hold the whole of me.

--And may I ask what that was?--I said.

--The Human sect,--the Master answered.  That has about room enough for
me,--at present, I mean to say.

--Including cannibals and all?--said I.

-Oh, as to that, the eating of one's kind is a matter of taste, but the
roasting of them has been rather more a specialty of our own particular
belief than of any other I am acquainted with.  If you broil a saint, I
don't see why, if you have a mind, you shouldn't serve him up at your--

Pop! went the little piece of artillery.  Don't tell me it was accident.
I know better.  You can't suppose for one minute that a boy like that one
would time his interruptions so cleverly.  Now it so happened that at
that particular moment Dr. B. Franklin was not at the table.  You may
draw your own conclusions.  I say nothing, but I think a good deal.

--I came back to the Bunker Hill Monument.---I often think--I said--of
the dynasty which is to reign in its shadow for some thousands of years,
it may be.

The "Man of Letters," so called, asked me, in a tone I did not exactly
like, whether I expected to live long enough to see a monarchy take the
place of a republic in this country.

--No,--said I,--I was thinking of something very different.  I was
indulging a fancy of mine about the Man who is to sit at the foot of the
monument for one, or it may be two or three thousand years.  As long as
the monument stands and there is a city near it, there will always be a
man to take the names of visitors and extract some small tribute from
their pockets, I suppose.  I sometimes get thinking of the long, unbroken
succession of these men, until they come to look like one Man; continuous
in being, unchanging as the stone he watches, looking upon the successive
generations of human beings as they come and go, and outliving all the
dynasties of the world in all probability.  It has come to such a pass
that I never speak to the Man of the Monument without wanting to take my
hat off and feeling as if I were looking down a vista of twenty or thirty
centuries.

The "Man of Letters," so called, said, in a rather contemptuous way, I
thought, that he had n't got so far as that.  He was n't quite up to
moral reflections on toll-men and ticket-takers.  Sentiment was n't his
tap.

He looked round triumphantly for a response: but the Capitalist was a
little hard of hearing just then; the Register of Deeds was browsing on
his food in the calm bovine abstraction of a quadruped, and paid no
attention; the Salesman had bolted his breakfast, and whisked himself
away with that peculiar alacrity which belongs to the retail dealer's
assistant; and the Member of the Haouse, who had sometimes seemed to be
impressed with his "tahlented mahn's" air of superiority to the rest of
us, looked as if he thought the speaker was not exactly parliamentary.
So he failed to make his point, and reddened a little, and was not in the
best humor, I thought, when he left the table.  I hope he will not let
off any of his irritation on our poor little Scheherezade; but the truth
is, the first person a man of this sort (if he is what I think him)
meets, when he is out of humor, has to be made a victim of, and I only
hope our Young Girl will not have to play Jephthah's daughter.

And that leads me to say, I cannot help thinking that the kind of
criticism to which this Young Girl has been subjected from some person or
other, who is willing to be smart at her expense, is hurtful and not
wholesome.  The question is a delicate one.  So many foolish persons are
rushing into print, that it requires a kind of literary police to hold
them back and keep them in order.  Where there are mice there must be
cats, and where there are rats we may think it worth our while to keep a
terrier, who will give them a shake and let them drop, with all the
mischief taken out of them. But the process is a rude and cruel one at
best, and it too often breeds a love of destructiveness for its own sake
in those who get their living by it.  A poor poem or essay does not do
much harm after all; nobody reads it who is like to be seriously hurt by
it.  But a sharp criticism with a drop of witty venom in it stings a
young author almost to death, and makes an old one uncomfortable to no
purpose.  If it were my business to sit in judgment on my neighbors, I
would try to be courteous, at least, to those who had done any good
service, but, above all, I would handle tenderly those young authors who
are coming before the public in the flutter of their first or early
appearance, and are in the trembling delirium of stage-fright already.
Before you write that brilliant notice of some alliterative Angelina's
book of verses, I wish you would try this experiment.

Take half a sheet of paper and copy upon it any of Angelina's
stanzas,--the ones you were going to make fun of, if you will.  Now go to
your window, if it is a still day, open it, and let the half-sheet of
paper drop on the outside.  How gently it falls through the soft air,
always tending downwards, but sliding softly, from side to side,
wavering, hesitating, balancing, until it settles as noiselessly as a
snow-flake upon the all-receiving bosom of the earth!  Just such would
have been the fate of poor Angelina's fluttering effort, if you had left
it to itself.  It would have slanted downward into oblivion so sweetly
and softly that she would have never known when it reached that harmless
consummation.

Our epizoic literature is becoming so extensive that nobody is safe from
its ad infinitum progeny.  A man writes a book of criticisms.  A
Quarterly Review criticises the critic.  A Monthly Magazine takes up the
critic's critic.  A Weekly Journal criticises the critic of the critic's
critic, and a daily paper favors us with some critical remarks on the
performance of the writer in the Weekly, who has criticised the critical
notice in the Monthly of the critical essay in the Quarterly on the
critical work we started with.  And thus we see that as each flea "has
smaller fleas that on him prey," even the critic himself cannot escape
the common lot of being bitten.  Whether all this is a blessing or a
curse, like that one which made Pharaoh and all his household run to
their toilet-tables, is a question about which opinions might differ.
The physiologists of the time of Moses--if there were vivisectors other
than priests in those days--would probably have considered that other
plague, of the frogs, as a fortunate opportunity for science, as this
poor little beast has been the souffre-douleur of experimenters and
schoolboys from time immemorial.

But there is a form of criticism to which none will object.  It is
impossible to come before a public so alive with sensibilities as this we
live in, with the smallest evidence of a sympathetic disposition, without
making friends in a very unexpected way. Everywhere there are minds
tossing on the unquiet waves of doubt.  If you confess to the same
perplexities and uncertainties that torture them, they are grateful for
your companionship.  If you have groped your way out of the wilderness in
which you were once wandering with them, they will follow your footsteps,
it may be, and bless you as their deliverer.  So, all at once, a writer
finds he has a parish of devout listeners, scattered, it is true, beyond
the reach of any summons but that of a trumpet like the archangel's, to
whom his slight discourse may be of more value than the exhortations they
hear from the pulpit, if these last do not happen to suit their special
needs.  Young men with more ambition and intelligence than force of
character, who have missed their first steps in life and are stumbling
irresolute amidst vague aims and changing purposes, hold out their hands,
imploring to be led into, or at least pointed towards, some path where
they can find a firm foothold.  Young women born into a chilling
atmosphere of circumstance which keeps all the buds of their nature
unopened and always striving to get to a ray of sunshine, if one finds
its way to their neighborhood, tell their stories, sometimes simply and
touchingly, sometimes in a more or less affected and rhetorical way, but
still stories of defeated and disappointed instincts which ought to make
any moderately impressible person feel very tenderly toward them.

In speaking privately to these young persons, many of whom have literary
aspirations, one should be very considerate of their human feelings.  But
addressing them collectively a few plain truths will not give any one of
them much pain.  Indeed, almost every individual among them will feel
sure that he or she is an exception to those generalities which apply so
well to the rest.

If I were a literary Pope sending out an Encyclical, I would tell these
inexperienced persons that nothing is so frequent as to mistake an
ordinary human gift for a special and extraordinary endowment. The
mechanism of breathing and that of swallowing are very wonderful, and if
one had seen and studied them in his own person only, he might well think
himself a prodigy.  Everybody knows these and other bodily faculties are
common gifts; but nobody except editors and school-teachers and here and
there a literary than knows how common is the capacity of rhyming and
prattling in readable prose, especially among young women of a certain
degree of education.  In my character of Pontiff, I should tell these
young persons that most of them labored under a delusion.  It is very
hard to believe it; one feels so full of intelligence and so decidedly
superior to one's dull relations and schoolmates; one writes so easily
and the lines sound so prettily to one's self; there are such felicities
of expression, just like those we hear quoted from the great poets; and
besides one has been told by so many friends that all one had to do was
to print and be famous! Delusion, my poor dear, delusion at least
nineteen times out of twenty, yes, ninety-nine times in a hundred.

But as private father confessor, I always allow as much as I can for the
one chance in the hundred.  I try not to take away all hope, unless the
case is clearly desperate, and then to direct the activities into some
other channel.

Using kind language, I can talk pretty freely.  I have counselled more
than one aspirant after literary fame to go back to his tailor's board or
his lapstone.  I have advised the dilettanti, whose foolish friends
praised their verses or their stories, to give up all their deceptive
dreams of making a name by their genius, and go to work in the study of a
profession which asked only for the diligent use of average; ordinary
talents.  It is a very grave responsibility which these unknown
correspondents throw upon their chosen counsellors. One whom you have
never seen, who lives in a community of which you know nothing, sends you
specimens more or less painfully voluminous of his writings, which he
asks you to read over, think over, and pray over, and send back an answer
informing him whether fame and fortune are awaiting him as the possessor
of the wonderful gifts his writings manifest, and whether you advise him
to leave all,--the shop he sweeps out every morning, the ledger he posts,
the mortar in which he pounds, the bench at which he urges the reluctant
plane,--and follow his genius whithersoever it may lead him.  The next
correspondent wants you to mark out a whole course of life for him, and
the means of judgment he gives you are about as adequate as the brick
which the simpleton of old carried round as an advertisement of the house
he had to sell.  My advice to all the young men that write to me depends
somewhat on the handwriting and spelling.  If these are of a certain
character, and they have reached a mature age, I recommend some honest
manual calling, such as they have very probably been bred to, and which
will, at least, give them a chance of becoming President of the United
States by and by, if that is any object to them.  What would you have
done with the young person who called on me a good many years ago, so
many that he has probably forgotten his literary effort,--and read as
specimens of his literary workmanship lines like those which I will favor
you with presently?  He was an able-bodied, grown-up young person, whose
ingenuousness interested me; and I am sure if I thought he would ever be
pained to see his maiden effort in print, I would deny myself the
pleasure of submitting it to the reader.  The following is an exact
transcript of the lines he showed me, and which I took down on the spot:

    "Are you in the vein for cider?
     Are you in the tune for pork?
     Hist! for Betty's cleared the larder
     And turned the pork to soap."

Do not judge too hastily this sincere effort of a maiden muse.  Here was
a sense of rhythm, and an effort in the direction of rhyme; here was an
honest transcript of an occurrence of daily life, told with a certain
idealizing expression, recognizing the existence of impulses, mysterious
instincts, impelling us even in the selection of our bodily sustenance.
But I had to tell him that it wanted dignity of incident and grace of
narrative, that there was no atmosphere to it, nothing of the light that
never was and so forth.  I did not say this in these very words, but I
gave him to understand, without being too hard upon him, that he had
better not desert his honest toil in pursuit of the poet's bays.  This,
it must be confessed, was a rather discouraging case.  A young person
like this may pierce, as the Frenchmen say, by and by, but the chances
are all the other way.

I advise aimless young men to choose some profession without needless
delay, and so get into a good strong current of human affairs, and find
themselves bound up in interests with a compact body of their fellow-men.

I advise young women who write to me for counsel,--perhaps I do not
advise them at all, only sympathize a little with them, and listen to
what they have to say (eight closely written pages on the average, which
I always read from beginning to end, thinking of the widow's cruse and
myself in the character of Elijah) and--and--come now, I don't believe
Methuselah would tell you what he said in his letters to young ladies,
written when he was in his nine hundred and sixty-ninth year.

But, dear me! how much work all this private criticism involves!  An
editor has only to say "respectfully declined," and there is the end of
it.  But the confidential adviser is expected to give the reasons of his
likes and dislikes in detail, and sometimes to enter into an argument for
their support.  That is more than any martyr can stand, but what trials
he must go through, as it is!  Great bundles of manuscripts, verse or
prose, which the recipient is expected to read, perhaps to recommend to a
publisher, at any rate to express a well-digested and agreeably flavored
opinion about; which opinion, nine times out of ten, disguise it as we
may, has to be a bitter draught; every form of egotism, conceit, false
sentiment, hunger for notoriety, and eagerness for display of anserine
plumage before the admiring public;--all these come in by mail or
express, covered with postage-stamps of so much more cost than the value
of the waste words they overlie, that one comes at last to groan and
change color at the very sight of a package, and to dread the postman's
knock as if it were that of the other visitor whose naked knuckles rap at
every door.

Still there are experiences which go far towards repaying all these
inflictions.  My last young man's case looked desperate enough; some of
his sails had blown from the rigging, some were backing in the wind, and
some were flapping and shivering, but I told him which way to head, and
to my surprise he promised to do just as I directed, and I do not doubt
is under full sail at this moment.

What if I should tell my last, my very recent experience with the other
sex?  I received a paper containing the inner history of a young woman's
life, the evolution of her consciousness from its earliest record of
itself, written so thoughtfully, so sincerely, with so much firmness and
yet so much delicacy, with such truth of detail and such grace in the
manner of telling, that I finished the long manuscript almost at a
sitting, with a pleasure rarely, almost never experienced in voluminous
communications which one has to spell out of handwriting.  This was from
a correspondent who made my acquaintance by letter when she was little
more than a child, some years ago.  How easy at that early period to have
silenced her by indifference, to have wounded her by a careless epithet,
perhaps even to have crushed her as one puts his heel on a weed!  A very
little encouragement kept her from despondency, and brought back one of
those overflows of gratitude which make one more ashamed of himself for
being so overpaid than he would be for having committed any of the lesser
sins.  But what pleased me most in the paper lately received was to see
how far the writer had outgrown the need of any encouragement of mine;
that she had strengthened out of her tremulous questionings into a
self-reliance and self-poise which I had hardly dared to anticipate for
her.  Some of my readers who are also writers have very probably had more
numerous experiences of this kind than I can lay claim to;
self-revelations from unknown and sometimes nameless friends, who write
from strange corners where the winds have wafted some stray words of
theirs which have lighted in the minds and reached the hearts of those to
whom they were as the angel that stirred the pool of Bethesda.  Perhaps
this is the best reward authorship brings; it may not imply much talent
or literary excellence, but it means that your way of thinking and
feeling is just what some one of your fellow-creatures needed.

--I have been putting into shape, according to his request, some further
passages from the Young Astronomer's manuscript, some of which the reader
will have a chance to read if he is so disposed. The conflict in the
young man's mind between the desire for fame and the sense of its
emptiness as compared with nobler aims has set me thinking about the
subject from a somewhat humbler point of view.  As I am in the habit of
telling you, Beloved, many of my thoughts, as well as of repeating what
was said at our table, you may read what follows as if it were addressed
to you in the course of an ordinary conversation, where I claimed rather
more than my share, as I am afraid I am a little in the habit of doing.

I suppose we all, those of us who write in verse or prose, have the
habitual feeling that we should like to be remembered.  It is to be awake
when all of those who were round us have been long wrapped in slumber.
It is a pleasant thought enough that the name by which we have been
called shall be familiar on the lips of those who come after us, and the
thoughts that wrought themselves out in our intelligence, the emotions
that trembled through our frames, shall live themselves over again in the
minds and hearts of others.

But is there not something of rest, of calm, in the thought of gently and
gradually fading away out of human remembrance?  What line have we
written that was on a level with our conceptions?  What page of ours that
does not betray some weakness we would fain have left unrecorded?  To
become a classic and share the life of a language is to be ever open to
criticisms, to comparisons, to the caprices of successive generations, to
be called into court and stand a trial before a new jury, once or more
than once in every century.  To be forgotten is to sleep in peace with
the undisturbed myriads, no longer subject to the chills and heats, the
blasts, the sleet, the dust, which assail in endless succession that
shadow of a man which we call his reputation.  The line which dying we
could wish to blot has been blotted out for us by a hand so tender, so
patient, so used to its kindly task, that the page looks as fair as if it
had never borne the record of our infirmity or our transgression.  And
then so few would be wholly content with their legacy of fame.  You
remember poor Monsieur Jacques's complaint of the favoritism shown to
Monsieur Berthier,--it is in that exquisite "Week in a French
Country-House."  "Have you seen his room?  Have you seen how large it is?
Twice as large as mine!  He has two jugs, a large one and a little one.
I have only one small one.  And a tea-service and a gilt Cupid on the top
of his looking-glass." The famous survivor of himself has had his
features preserved in a medallion, and the slice of his countenance seems
clouded with the thought that it does not belong to a bust; the bust
ought to look happy in its niche, but the statue opposite makes it feel
as if it had been cheated out of half its personality, and the statue
looks uneasy because another stands on a loftier pedestal. But "Ignotus"
and "Miserrimus" are of the great majority in that vast assembly, that
House of Commons whose members are all peers, where to be forgotten is
the standing rule.  The dignity of a silent memory is not to be
undervalued.  Fame is after all a kind of rude handling, and a name that
is often on vulgar lips seems to borrow something not to be desired, as
the paper money that passes from hand to hand gains somewhat which is a
loss thereby.  O sweet, tranquil refuge of oblivion, so far as earth is
concerned, for us poor blundering, stammering, misbehaving creatures who
cannot turn over a leaf of our life's diary without feeling thankful that
its failure can no longer stare us in the face!  Not unwelcome shall be
the baptism of dust which hides forever the name that was given in the
baptism of water!  We shall have good company whose names are left
unspoken by posterity.  "Who knows whether the best of men be known, or
whether there be not more remarkable persons forgot than any that stand
remembered in the known account of time?  The greater part must be
content to be as though they had not been; to be found in the register of
God, not in the record of man.  Twenty-seven names make up the first
story before the flood, and the recorded names ever since contain not one
living century."

I have my moods about such things as the Young Astronomer has, as we all
have.  There are times when the thought of becoming utterly nothing to
the world we knew so well and loved so much is painful and oppressive; we
gasp as if in a vacuum, missing the atmosphere of life we have so long
been in the habit of breathing.  Not the less are there moments when the
aching need of repose comes over us and the requiescat in pace, heathen
benediction as it is, sounds more sweetly in our ears than all the
promises that Fame can hold out to us.

I wonder whether it ever occurred to you to reflect upon another horror
there must be in leaving a name behind you.  Think what a horrid piece of
work the biographers make of a man's private history! Just imagine the
subject of one of those extraordinary fictions called biographies coming
back and reading the life of himself, written very probably by somebody
or other who thought he could turn a penny by doing it, and having the
pleasure of seeing

    "His little bark attendant sail,
     Pursue the triumph and partake the gale."

The ghost of the person condemned to walk the earth in a biography glides
into a public library, and goes to the shelf where his mummied life lies
in its paper cerements.  I can see the pale shadow glancing through the
pages and hear the comments that shape themselves in the bodiless
intelligence as if they were made vocal by living lips.

"Born in July, 1776!"  And my honored father killed at the battle of
Bunker Hill!  Atrocious libeller! to slander one's family at the start
after such a fashion!

"The death of his parents left him in charge of his Aunt Nancy, whose
tender care took the place of those parental attentions which should have
guided and protected his infant years, and consoled him for the severity
of another relative."

--Aunt Nancy!  It was Aunt Betsey, you fool!  Aunt Nancy used to--she has
been dead these eighty years, so there is no use in mincing matters--she
used to keep a bottle and a stick, and when she had been tasting a drop
out of the bottle the stick used to come off the shelf and I had to taste
that.  And here she is made a saint of, and poor Aunt Betsey, that did
everything for me, is slandered by implication as a horrid tyrant.

"The subject of this commemorative history was remarkable for a
precocious development of intelligence.  An old nurse who saw him at the
very earliest period of his existence is said to have spoken of him as
one of the most promising infants she had seen in her long experience.
At school he was equally remarkable, and at a tender age he received a
paper adorned with a cut, inscribed REWARD OF MERIT."

--I don't doubt the nurse said that,--there were several promising
children born about that time.  As for cuts, I got more from the
schoolmaster's rattan than in any other shape.  Didn't one of my teachers
split a Gunter's scale into three pieces over the palm of my hand?  And
didn't I grin when I saw the pieces fly?  No humbug, now, about my
boyhood!

"His personal appearance was not singularly prepossessing. Inconspicuous
in stature and unattractive in features"

--You misbegotten son of an ourang and grandson of an ascidian (ghosts
keep up with science, you observe), what business have you to be holding
up my person to the contempt of my posterity?  Haven't I been sleeping
for this many a year in quiet, and don't the dandelions and buttercups
look as yellow over me as over the best-looking neighbor I have in the
dormitory?  Why do you want to people the minds of everybody that reads
your good-for-nothing libel which you call a "biography" with your
impudent caricatures of a man who was a better-looking fellow than
yourself, I 'll bet you ten to one, a man whom his Latin tutor called
fommosus puer when he was only a freshman?  If that's what it means to
make a reputation,--to leave your character and your person, and the good
name of your sainted relatives, and all you were, and all you had and
thought and felt, so far as can be gathered by digging you out of your
most private records, to be manipulated and bandied about and cheapened
in the literary market as a chicken or a turkey or a goose is handled and
bargained over at a provision stall, is n't it better to be content with
the honest blue slate-stone and its inscription informing posterity that
you were a worthy citizen and a respected father of a family?

--I should like to see any man's biography with corrections and
emendations by his ghost.  We don't know each other's secrets quite so
well as we flatter ourselves we do.  We don't always know our own secrets
as well as we might.  You have seen a tree with different grafts upon it,
an apple or a pear tree we will say.  In the late summer months the fruit
on one bough will ripen; I remember just such a tree, and the early
ripening fruit was the Jargonelle.  By and by the fruit of another bough
will begin to come into condition; the lovely Saint Michael, as I
remember, grew on the same stock as the Jargonelle in the tree I am
thinking of; and then, when these have all fallen or been gathered,
another, we will say the Winter Nelis, has its turn, and so out of the
same juices have come in succession fruits of the most varied aspects and
flavors.  It is the same thing with ourselves, but it takes us a long
while to find it out.  The various inherited instincts ripen in
succession.  You may be nine tenths paternal at one period of your life,
and nine tenths maternal at another.  All at once the traits of some
immediate ancestor may come to maturity unexpectedly on one of the
branches of your character, just as your features at different periods of
your life betray different resemblances to your nearer or more remote
relatives.

But I want you to let me go back to the Bunker Hill Monument and the
dynasty of twenty or thirty centuries whose successive representatives
are to sit in the gate, like the Jewish monarchs, while the people shall
come by hundreds and by thousands to visit the memorial shaft until the
story of Bunker's Hill is as old as that of Marathon.

Would not one like to attend twenty consecutive soirees, at each one of
which the lion of the party should be the Man of the Monument, at the
beginning of each century, all the way, we will say, from Anno Domini
2000 to Ann. Dom. 4000,--or, if you think the style of dating will be
changed, say to Ann.  Darwinii (we can keep A. D. you see) 1872?  Will
the Man be of the Indian type, as President Samuel Stanhope Smith and
others have supposed the transplanted European will become by and by?
Will he have shortened down to four feet and a little more, like the
Esquimaux, or will he have been bred up to seven feet by the use of new
chemical diets, ozonized and otherwise improved atmospheres, and animal
fertilizers?  Let us summon him in imagination and ask him a few
questions.

Is n't it like splitting a toad out of a rock to think of this man of
nineteen or twenty centuries hence coming out from his stony
dwelling-place and speaking with us?  What are the questions we should
ask him?  He has but a few minutes to stay.  Make out your own list; I
will set down a few that come up to me as I write.

--What is the prevalent religious creed of civilization?

--Has the planet met with any accident of importance?

--How general is the republican form of government?

--Do men fly yet?

--Has the universal language come into use?

--Is there a new fuel since the English coal-mines have given out?

--Is the euthanasia a recognized branch of medical science?

--Is the oldest inhabitant still living?

--Is the Daily Advertiser still published?

--And the Evening Transcript?

--Is there much inquiry for the works of a writer of the nineteenth
century (Old Style) by--the name of--of--

My tongue cleaves to the roof of my mouth.  I cannot imagine the putting
of that question without feeling the tremors which shake a wooer as he
falters out the words the answer to which will make him happy or
wretched.

Whose works was I going to question him about, do you ask me? Oh, the
writings of a friend of mine, much esteemed by his relatives and others.
But it's of no consequence, after all; I think he says he does not care
much for posthumous reputation.

I find something of the same interest in thinking about one of the
boarders at our table that I find in my waking dreams concerning the Man
of the Monument.  This personage is the Register of Deeds.  He is an
unemotional character, living in his business almost as exclusively as
the Scarabee, but without any of that eagerness and enthusiasm which
belong to our scientific specialist.  His work is largely, principally, I
may say, mechanical.  He has developed, however, a certain amount of
taste for the antiquities of his department, and once in a while brings
out some curious result of his investigations into ancient documents.  He
too belongs to a dynasty which will last as long as there is such a thing
as property in land and dwellings.  When that is done away with, and we
return to the state of villanage, holding our tenement-houses, all to be
of the same pattern, of the State, that is to say, of the Tammany Ring
which is to take the place of the feudal lord,--the office of Register of
Deeds will, I presume, become useless, and the dynasty will be deposed.

As we grow older we think more and more of old persons and of old things
and places.  As to old persons, it seems as if we never know how much
they have to tell until we are old ourselves and they have been gone
twenty or thirty years.  Once in a while we come upon some survivor of
his or her generation that we have overlooked, and feel as if we had
recovered one of the lost books of Livy or fished up the golden
candlestick from the ooze of the Tiber.  So it was the other day after my
reminiscences of the old gambrel-roofed house and its visitors.  They
found an echo in the recollections of one of the brightest and liveliest
of my suburban friends, whose memory is exact about everything except her
own age, which, there can be no doubt, she makes out a score or two of
years more than it really is.  Still she was old enough to touch some
lights--and a shadow or two--into the portraits I had drawn, which made
me wish that she and not I had been the artist who sketched the pictures.
Among the lesser regrets that mingle with graver sorrows for the friends
of an earlier generation we have lost, are our omissions to ask them so
many questions they could have answered easily enough, and would have
been pleased to be asked.  There!  I say to myself sometimes, in an
absent mood, I must ask her about that.  But she of whom I am now
thinking has long been beyond the reach of any earthly questioning, and I
sigh to think how easily I could have learned some fact which I should
have been happy to have transmitted with pious care to those who are to
come after me.  How many times I have heard her quote the line about
blessings brightening as they take their flight, and how true it proves
in many little ways that one never thinks of until it is too late.

The Register of Deeds is not himself advanced in years.  But he borrows
an air of antiquity from the ancient records which are stored in his
sepulchral archives.  I love to go to his ossuary of dead transactions,
as I would visit the catacombs of Rome or Paris.  It is like wandering up
the Nile to stray among the shelves of his monumental folios.  Here
stands a series of volumes, extending over a considerable number of
years, all of which volumes are in his handwriting.  But as you go
backward there is a break, and you come upon the writing of another
person, who was getting old apparently, for it is beginning to be a
little shaky, and then you know that you have gone back as far as the
last days of his predecessor.  Thirty or forty years more carry you to
the time when this incumbent began the duties of his office; his hand was
steady then; and the next volume beyond it in date betrays the work of a
still different writer.  All this interests me, but I do not see how it
is going to interest my reader.  I do not feel very happy about the
Register of Deeds.  What can I do with him?  Of what use is he going to
be in my record of what I have seen and heard at the breakfast-table?
The fact of his being one of the boarders was not so important that I was
obliged to speak of him, and I might just as well have drawn on my
imagination and not allowed this dummy to take up the room which another
guest might have profitably filled at our breakfast-table.

I suppose he will prove a superfluity, but I have got him on my hands,
and I mean that he shall be as little in the way as possible. One always
comes across people in actual life who have no particular business to be
where we find them, and whose right to be at all is somewhat
questionable.

I am not going to get rid of the Register of Deeds by putting him out of
the way; but I confess I do not see of what service he is going to be to
me in my record.  I have often found, however, that the Disposer of men
and things understands much better than we do how to place his pawns and
other pieces on the chess-board of life.  A fish more or less in the
ocean does not seem to amount to much.  It is not extravagant to say that
any one fish may be considered a supernumerary.  But when Captain Coram's
ship sprung a leak and the carpenter could not stop it, and the
passengers had made up their minds that it was all over with them, all at
once, without any apparent reason, the pumps began gaining on the leak,
and the sinking ship to lift herself out of the abyss which was
swallowing her up. And what do you think it was that saved the ship, and
Captain Coram, and so in due time gave to London that Foundling Hospital
which he endowed, and under the floor of which he lies buried?  Why, it
was that very supernumerary fish, which we held of so little account, but
which had wedged itself into the rent of the yawning planks, and served
to keep out the water until the leak was finally stopped.

I am very sure it was Captain Coram, but I almost hope it was somebody
else, in order to give some poor fellow who is lying in wait for the
periodicals a chance to correct me.  That will make him happy for a
month, and besides, he will not want to pick a quarrel about anything
else if he has that splendid triumph.  You remember Alcibiades and his
dog's tail.

Here you have the extracts I spoke of from the manuscript placed in my
hands for revision and emendation.  I can understand these alternations
of feeling in a young person who has been long absorbed in a single
pursuit, and in whom the human instincts which have been long silent are
now beginning to find expression.  I know well what he wants; a great
deal better, I think, than he knows himself.

          WIND-CLOUDS AND STAR-DRIFTS.

                    II

     Brief glimpses of the bright celestial spheres,
     False lights, false shadows, vague, uncertain gleams,
     Pale vaporous mists, wan streaks of lurid flame,
     The climbing of the upward-sailing cloud,
     The sinking of the downward-falling star,
     All these are pictures of the changing moods
     Borne through the midnight stillness of my soul.

     Here am I, bound upon this pillared rock,
     Prey to the vulture of a vast desire
     That feeds upon my life.  I burst my bands
     And steal a moment's freedom from the beak,
     The clinging talons and the shadowing plumes;
     Then comes the false enchantress, with her song;
     "Thou wouldst not lay thy forehead in the dust
     Like the base herd that feeds and breeds and dies!
     Lo, the fair garlands that I weave for thee,
     Unchanging as the belt Orion wears,
     Bright as the jewels of the seven-starred Crown,
     The spangled stream of Berenice's hair!"
     And so she twines the fetters with the flowers
     Around my yielding limbs, and the fierce bird
     Stoops to his quarry,--then to feed his rage
     Of ravening hunger I must drain my blood
     And let the dew-drenched, poison-breeding night
     Steal all the freshness from my fading cheek,
     And leave its shadows round my caverned eyes.
     All for a line in some unheeded scroll;
     All for a stone that tells to gaping clowns,
     "Here lies a restless wretch beneath a clod
     Where squats the jealous nightmare men call Fame!"

     I marvel not at him who scorns his kind
     And thinks not sadly of the time foretold
     When the old hulk we tread shall be a wreck,
     A slag, a cinder drifting through the sky
     Without its crew of fools!  We live too long
     And even so are not content to die,
     But load the mould that covers up our bones
     With stones that stand like beggars by the road
     And show death's grievous wound and ask for tears;
     Write our great books to teach men who we are,
     Sing our fine songs that tell in artful phrase
     The secrets of our lives, and plead and pray
     For alms of memory with the after time,
     Those few swift seasons while the earth shall wear
     Its leafy summers, ere its core grows cold
     And the moist life of all that breathes shall die;
     Or as the new-born seer, perchance more wise,
     Would have us deem, before its growing mass,
     Pelted with stardust, atoned with meteor-balls,
     Heats like a hammered anvil, till at last Man
     and his works and all that stirred itself
     Of its own motion, in the fiery glow
     Turns to a flaming vapor, and our orb
     Shines a new sun for earths that shall be born.

     I am as old as Egypt to myself,
     Brother to them that squared the pyramids
     By the same stars I watch.  I read the page
     Where every letter is a glittering world,
     With them who looked from Shinar's clay-built towers,
     Ere yet the wanderer of the Midland sea
     Had missed the fallen sister of the seven.
     I dwell in spaces vague, remote, unknown,
     Save to the silent few, who, leaving earth,
     Quit all communion with their living time.
     I lose myself in that ethereal void,
     Till I have tired my wings and long to fill
     My breast with denser air, to stand, to walk
     With eyes not raised above my fellow-men.
     Sick of my unwalled, solitary realm,
     I ask to change the myriad lifeless worlds
     I visit as mine own for one poor patch
     Of this dull spheroid and a little breath
     To shape in word or deed to serve my kind.

     Was ever giant's dungeon dug so deep,
     Was ever tyrant's fetter forged so strong,
     Was e'er such deadly poison in the draught
     The false wife mingles for the trusting fool,
     As he whose willing victim is himself,
     Digs, forges, mingles, for his captive soul?




VII

I was very sure that the old Master was hard at work about something,--he
is always very busy with something,--but I mean something particular.

Whether it was a question of history or of cosmogony, or whether he was
handling a test-tube or a blow-pipe; what he was about I did not feel
sure; but I took it for granted that it was some crucial question or
other he was at work on, some point bearing on the thought of the time.
For the Master, I have observed, is pretty sagacious in striking for the
points where his work will be like to tell.  We all know that class of
scientific laborers to whom all facts are alike nourishing mental food,
and who seem to exercise no choice whatever, provided only they can get
hold of these same indiscriminate facts in quantity sufficient.  They
browse on them, as the animal to which they would not like to be compared
browses on his thistles.  But the Master knows the movement of the age he
belongs to; and if he seems to be busy with what looks like a small piece
of trivial experimenting, one may feel pretty sure that he knows what he
is about, and that his minute operations are looking to a result that
will help him towards attaining his great end in life,--an insight, so
far as his faculties and opportunities will allow, into that order of
things which he believes he can study with some prospect of taking in its
significance.

I became so anxious to know what particular matter he was busy with, that
I had to call upon him to satisfy my curiosity.  It was with a little
trepidation that I knocked at his door.  I felt a good deal as one might
have felt on disturbing an alchemist at his work, at the very moment, it
might be, when he was about to make projection.

--Come in!--said the Master in his grave, massive tones.

I passed through the library with him into a little room evidently
devoted to his experiments.

--You have come just at the right moment,--he said.--Your eyes are better
than mine.  I have been looking at this flask, and I should like to have
you look at it.

It was a small matrass, as one of the elder chemists would have called
it, containing a fluid, and hermetically sealed.  He held it up at the
window; perhaps you remember the physician holding a flask to the light
in Gerard Douw's "Femme hydropique"; I thought of that fine figure as I
looked at him.  Look!--said he,--is it clear or cloudy?

--You need not ask me that,--I answered.  It is very plainly turbid. I
should think that some sediment had been shaken up in it.  What is it,
Elixir Vitae or Aurum potabile?

--Something that means more than alchemy ever did!  Boiled just three
hours, and as clear as a bell until within the last few days; since then
has been clouding up.

--I began to form a pretty shrewd guess at the meaning of all this, and
to think I knew very nearly what was coming next.  I was right in my
conjecture.  The Master broke off the sealed end of his little flask,
took out a small portion of the fluid on a glass rod, and placed it on a
slip of glass in the usual way for a microscopic examination.

--One thousand diameters,--he said, as he placed it on the stage of the
microscope.---We shall find signs of life, of course.--He bent over the
instrument and looked but an instant.

--There they are!--he exclaimed,--look in.

I looked in and saw some objects:

The straight linear bodies were darting backward and forward in every
direction.  The wavy ones were wriggling about like eels or water-snakes.
The round ones were spinning on their axes and rolling in every
direction.  All of them were in a state of incessant activity, as if
perpetually seeking something and never finding it.

They are tough, the germs of these little bodies, said the Master.
---Three hours' boiling has n't killed 'em.  Now, then, let us see what
has been the effect of six hours' boiling.

He took up another flask just like the first, containing fluid and
hermetically sealed in the same way.

--Boiled just three hours longer than the other, he said,--six hours in
all.  This is the experimentum crucis.  Do you see any cloudiness in it?

--Not a sign of it; it is as clear as crystal, except that there may be a
little sediment at the bottom.

--That is nothing.  The liquid is clear.  We shall find no signs of
life.---He put a minute drop of the liquid under the microscope as
before.  Nothing stirred.  Nothing to be seen but a clear circle of
light.  We looked at it again and again, but with the same result.

--Six hours kill 'em all, according to this experiment,--said the
Master.---Good as far as it goes.  One more negative result.  Do you know
what would have happened if that liquid had been clouded, and we had
found life in the sealed flask?  Sir, if that liquid had held life in it
the Vatican would have trembled to hear it, and there would have been
anxious questionings and ominous whisperings in the halls of Lambeth
palace!  The accepted cosmogonies on trial, sir!

Traditions, sanctities, creeds, ecclesiastical establishments, all
shaking to know whether my little sixpenny flask of fluid looks muddy or
not!  I don't know whether to laugh or shudder.  The thought of an
oecumenical council having its leading feature dislocated by my trifling
experiment!  The thought, again, of the mighty revolution in human
beliefs and affairs that might grow out of the same insignificant little
phenomenon.  A wine-glassful of clear liquid growing muddy.  If we had
found a wriggle, or a zigzag, or a shoot from one side to the other, in
this last flask, what a scare there would have been, to be sure, in the
schools of the prophets!  Talk about your megatherium and your
megalosaurus,--what are these to the bacterium and the vibrio?  These are
the dreadful monsters of today. If they show themselves where they have
no business, the little rascals frighten honest folks worse than ever
people were frightened by the Dragon of Rhodes!

The Master gets going sometimes, there is no denying it, until his
imagination runs away with him.  He had been trying, as the reader sees,
one of those curious experiments in spontaneous generation, as it is
called, which have been so often instituted of late years, and by none
more thoroughly than by that eminent American student of nature
(Professor Jeffries Wyman) whose process he had imitated with a result
like his.

We got talking over these matters among us the next morning at the
breakfast-table.

We must agree they couldn't stand six hours' boiling,--I said.

--Good for the Pope of Rome!--exclaimed the Master.

--The Landlady drew back with a certain expression of dismay in her
countenance.  She hoped he did n't want the Pope to make any more
converts in this country.  She had heard a sermon only last Sabbath, and
the minister had made it out, she thought, as plain as could be, that the
Pope was the Man of Sin and that the Church of Rome was--Well, there was
very strong names applied to her in Scripture.

What was good for the Pope was good for your minister, too, my dear
madam,--said the Master.  Good for everybody that is afraid of what
people call "science." If it should prove that dead things come to life
of themselves, it would be awkward, you know, because then somebody will
get up and say if one dead thing made itself alive another might, and so
perhaps the earth peopled itself without any help.  Possibly the
difficulty wouldn't be so great as many people suppose.  We might perhaps
find room for a Creator after all, as we do now, though we see a little
brown seed grow till it sucks up the juices of half an acre of ground,
apparently all by its own inherent power.  That does not stagger us; I am
not sure that it would if Mr. Crosses or Mr. Weekes's acarus should show
himself all of a sudden, as they said he did, in certain mineral mixtures
acted on by electricity.

The Landlady was off soundings, and looking vacant enough by this time.

The Master turned to me.---Don't think too much of the result of our one
experiment.  It means something, because it confirms those other
experiments of which it was a copy; but we must remember that a hundred
negatives don't settle such a question.  Life does get into the world
somehow.  You don't suppose Adam had the cutaneous unpleasantness
politely called psora, do you?

--Hardly,--I answered.---He must have been a walking hospital if he
carried all the maladies about him which have plagued his descendants.

--Well, then, how did the little beast which is peculiar to that special
complaint intrude himself into the Order of Things?  You don't suppose
there was a special act of creation for the express purpose of bestowing
that little wretch on humanity, do you?

I thought, on the whole, I would n't answer that question.

--You and I are at work on the same problem, said the Young Astronomer to
the Master.---I have looked into a microscope now and then, and I have
seen that perpetual dancing about of minute atoms in a fluid, which you
call molecular motion.  Just so, when I look through my telescope I see
the star-dust whirling about in the infinite expanse of ether; or if I do
not see its motion, I know that it is only on account of its immeasurable
distance.  Matter and motion everywhere; void and rest nowhere.  You ask
why your restless microscopic atoms may not come together and become
self-conscious and self-moving organisms.  I ask why my telescopic
star-dust may not come together and grow and organize into habitable
worlds,--the ripened fruit on the branches of the tree Yggdrasil, if I
may borrow from our friend the Poet's province.  It frightens people,
though, to hear the suggestion that worlds shape themselves from
star-mist.  It does not trouble them at all to see the watery spheres
that round themselves into being out of the vapors floating over us; they
are nothing but raindrops.  But if a planet can grow as a rain-drop
grows, why then--It was a great comfort to these timid folk when Lord
Rosse's telescope resolved certain nebula into star-clusters. Sir John
Herschel would have told them that this made little difference in
accounting for the formation of worlds by aggregation, but at any rate it
was a comfort to them.

--These people have always been afraid of the astronomers,--said the
Master.--They were shy, you know, of the Copernican system, for a long
while; well they might be with an oubliette waiting for them if they
ventured to think that the earth moved round the sun.  Science settled
that point finally for them, at length, and then it was all right,--when
there was no use in disputing the fact any longer.  By and by geology
began turning up fossils that told extraordinary stories about the
duration of life upon our planet.  What subterfuges were not used to get
rid of their evidence!  Think of a man seeing the fossilized skeleton of
an animal split out of a quarry, his teeth worn down by mastication, and
the remains of food still visible in his interior, and, in order to get
rid of a piece of evidence contrary to the traditions he holds to,
seriously maintaining that this skeleton never belonged to a living
creature, but was created with just these appearances; a make-believe, a
sham, a Barnum's-mermaid contrivance to amuse its Creator and impose upon
his intelligent children!  And now people talk about geological epochs
and hundreds of millions of years in the planet's history as calmly as if
they were discussing the age of their deceased great-grandmothers.  Ten
or a dozen years ago people said Sh!  Sh! if you ventured to meddle with
any question supposed to involve a doubt of the generally accepted Hebrew
traditions.  To-day such questions are recognized as perfectly fair
subjects for general conversation; not in the basement story, perhaps, or
among the rank and file of the curbstone congregations, but among
intelligent and educated persons. You may preach about them in your
pulpit, you may lecture about them, you may talk about them with the
first sensible-looking person you happen to meet, you may write magazine
articles about them, and the editor need not expect to receive
remonstrances from angry subscribers and withdrawals of subscriptions, as
he would have been sure to not a great many years ago.  Why, you may go
to a tea-party where the clergyman's wife shows her best cap and his
daughters display their shining ringlets, and you will hear the company
discussing the Darwinian theory of the origin of the human race as if it
were as harmless a question as that of the lineage of a spinster's
lapdog.  You may see a fine lady who is as particular in her
genuflections as any Buddhist or Mahometan saint in his manifestations of
reverence, who will talk over the anthropoid ape, the supposed founder of
the family to which we belong, and even go back with you to the
acephalous mollusk, first cousin to the clams and mussels, whose
rudimental spine was the hinted prophecy of humanity; all this time never
dreaming, apparently, that what she takes for a matter of curious
speculation involves the whole future of human progress and destiny.

I can't help thinking that if we had talked as freely as we can and do
now in the days of the first boarder at this table,--I mean the one who
introduced it to the public,--it would have sounded a good deal more
aggressively than it does now.--The old Master got rather warm in
talking; perhaps the consciousness of having a number of listeners had
something to do with it.

--This whole business is an open question,--he said,--and there is no use
in saying, "Hush! don't talk about such things!"  People do talk about
'em everywhere; and if they don't talk about 'em they think about 'em,
and that is worse,--if there is anything bad about such questions, that
is.  If for the Fall of man, science comes to substitute the RISE of man,
sir, it means the utter disintegration of all the spiritual pessimisms
which have been like a spasm in the heart and a cramp in the intellect of
men for so many centuries.  And yet who dares to say that it is not a
perfectly legitimate and proper question to be discussed, without the
slightest regard to the fears or the threats of Pope or prelate?

Sir, I believe,--the Master rose from his chair as he spoke, and said in
a deep and solemn tone, but without any declamatory vehemence,--sir, I
believe that we are at this moment in what will be recognized not many
centuries hence as one of the late watches in the night of the dark ages.
There is a twilight ray, beyond question.  We know something of the
universe, a very little, and, strangely enough, we know most of what is
farthest from us.  We have weighed the planets and analyzed the flames of
the--sun and stars.  We predict their movements as if they were machines
we ourselves had made and regulated.  We know a good deal about the earth
on which we live. But the study of man has been so completely subjected
to our preconceived opinions, that we have got to begin all over again.
We have studied anthropology through theology; we have now to begin the
study of theology through anthropology.  Until we have exhausted the
human element in every form of belief, and that can only be done by what
we may call comparative spiritual anatomy, we cannot begin to deal with
the alleged extra-human elements without blundering into all imaginable
puerilities.  If you think for one moment that there is not a single
religion in the world which does not come to us through the medium of a
preexisting language; and if you remember that this language embodies
absolutely nothing but human conceptions and human passions, you will see
at once that every religion presupposes its own elements as already
existing in those to whom it is addressed.  I once went to a church in
London and heard the famous Edward Irving preach, and heard some of his
congregation speak in the strange words characteristic of their
miraculous gift of tongues.  I had a respect for the logical basis of
this singular phenomenon.  I have always thought it was natural that any
celestial message should demand a language of its own, only to be
understood by divine illumination.  All human words tend, of course, to
stop short in human meaning.  And the more I hear the most sacred terms
employed, the more I am satisfied that they have entirely and radically
different meanings in the minds of those who use them.  Yet they deal
with them as if they were as definite as mathematical quantities or
geometrical figures.  What would become of arithmetic if the figure 2
meant three for one man and five for another and twenty for a third, and
all the other numerals were in the same way variable quantities? Mighty
intelligent correspondence business men would have with each other!  But
how is this any worse than the difference of opinion which led a famous
clergyman to say to a brother theologian, "Oh, I see, my dear sir, your
God is my Devil."

Man has been studied proudly, contemptuously, rather, from the point of
view supposed to be authoritatively settled.  The self-sufficiency of
egotistic natures was never more fully shown than in the expositions of
the worthlessness and wretchedness of their fellow-creatures given by the
dogmatists who have "gone back," as the vulgar phrase is, on their race,
their own flesh and blood.  Did you ever read what Mr. Bancroft says
about Calvin in his article on Jonathan Edwards?--and mighty well said it
is too, in my judgment.  Let me remind you of it, whether you have read
it or not.  "Setting himself up over against the privileged classes, he,
with a loftier pride than theirs, revealed the power of a yet higher
order of nobility, not of a registered ancestry of fifteen generations,
but one absolutely spotless in its escutcheon, preordained in the council
chamber of eternity."  I think you'll find I have got that sentence
right, word for word, and there 's a great deal more in it than many good
folks who call themselves after the reformer seem to be aware of.  The
Pope put his foot on the neck of kings, but Calvin and his cohort crushed
the whole human race under their heels in the name of the Lord of Hosts.
Now, you see, the point that people don't understand is the absolute and
utter humility of science, in opposition to this doctrinal
self-sufficiency.  I don't doubt this may sound a little paradoxical at
first, but I think you will find it is all right.  You remember the
courtier and the monarch,--Louis the Fourteenth, wasn't it?--never mind,
give the poor fellows that live by setting you right a chance.  "What
o'clock is it?" says the king.  "Just whatever o'clock your Majesty
pleases," says the courtier.  I venture to say the monarch was a great
deal more humble than the follower, who pretended that his master was
superior to such trifling facts as the revolution of the planet.  It was
the same thing, you remember, with King Canute and the tide on the
sea-shore.  The king accepted the scientific fact of the tide's rising.
The loyal hangers-on, who believed in divine right, were too proud of the
company they found themselves in to make any such humiliating admission.
But there are people, and plenty of them, to-day, who will dispute facts
just as clear to those who have taken the pains to learn what is known
about them, as that of the tide's rising.  They don't like to admit these
facts, because they throw doubt upon some of their cherished opinions.
We are getting on towards the last part of this nineteenth century.  What
we have gained is not so much in positive knowledge, though that is a
good deal, as it is in the freedom of discussion of every subject that
comes within the range of observation and inference.  How long is it
since Mrs. Piozzi wrote,--"Let me hope that you will not pursue geology
till it leads you into doubts destructive of all comfort in this world
and all happiness in the next"?

The Master paused and I remained silent, for I was thinking things I
could not say.

--It is well always to have a woman near by when one is talking on this
class of subjects.  Whether there will be three or four women to one man
in heaven is a question which I must leave to those who talk as if they
knew all about the future condition of the race to answer. But very
certainly there is much more of hearty faith, much more of spiritual
life, among women than among men, in this world.  They need faith to
support them more than men do, for they have a great deal less to call
them out of themselves, and it comes easier to them, for their habitual
state of dependence teaches them to trust in others. When they become
voters, if they ever do, it may be feared that the pews will lose what
the ward-rooms gain.  Relax a woman's hold on man, and her knee-joints
will soon begin to stiffen.  Self-assertion brings out many fine
qualities, but it does not promote devotional habits.

I remember some such thoughts as this were passing through my mind while
the Master was talking.  I noticed that the Lady was listening to the
conversation with a look of more than usual interest.  We men have the
talk mostly to ourselves at this table; the Master, as you have found
out, is fond of monologues, and I myself--well, I suppose I must own to a
certain love for the reverberated music of my own accents; at any rate,
the Master and I do most of the talking.  But others help us do the
listening.  I think I can show that they listen to some purpose.  I am
going to surprise my reader with a letter which I received very shortly
after the conversation took place which I have just reported.  It is of
course by a special license, such as belongs to the supreme prerogative
of an author, that I am enabled to present it to him.  He need ask no
questions: it is not his affair how I obtained the right to give
publicity to a private communication.  I have become somewhat more
intimately acquainted with the writer of it than in the earlier period of
my connection with this establishment, and I think I may say have gained
her confidence to a very considerable degree.

MY DEAR SIR:  The conversations I have had with you, limited as they have
been, have convinced me that I am quite safe in addressing you with
freedom on a subject which interests me, and others more than myself.  We
at our end of the table have been listening, more or less intelligently,
to the discussions going on between two or three of you gentlemen on
matters of solemn import to us all.  This is nothing very new to me.  I
have been used, from an early period of my life, to hear the discussion
of grave questions, both in politics and religion.  I have seen gentlemen
at my father's table get as warm over a theological point of dispute as
in talking over their political differences.  I rather think it has
always been very much so, in bad as well as in good company; for you
remember how Milton's fallen angels amused themselves with disputing on
"providence, foreknowledge, will, and fate," and it was the same thing in
that club Goldsmith writes so pleasantly about.  Indeed, why should not
people very often come, in the course of conversation, to the one subject
which lies beneath all else about which our thoughts are occupied?  And
what more natural than that one should be inquiring about what another
has accepted and ceased to have any doubts concerning?  It seems to me
all right that at the proper time, in the proper place, those who are
less easily convinced than their neighbors should have the fullest
liberty of calling to account all the opinions which others receive
without question.  Somebody must stand sentry at the outposts of belief,
and it is a sentry's business, I believe, to challenge every one who
comes near him, friend or foe.

I want you to understand fully that I am not one of those poor nervous
creatures who are frightened out of their wits when any question is
started that implies the disturbance of their old beliefs.  I manage to
see some of the periodicals, and now and then dip a little way into a new
book which deals with these curious questions you were talking about, and
others like them.  You know they find their way almost everywhere.  They
do not worry me in the least.  When I was a little girl, they used to say
that if you put a horsehair into a tub of water it would turn into a
snake in the course of a few days.  That did not seem to me so very much
stranger than it was that an egg should turn into a chicken.  What can I
say to that?  Only that it is the Lord's doings, and marvellous in my
eyes; and if our philosophical friend should find some little live
creatures, or what seem to be live creatures, in any of his messes, I
should say as much, and no more.  You do not think I would shut up my
Bible and Prayer-Book because there is one more thing I do not understand
in a world where I understand so very little of all the wonders that
surround me?

It may be very wrong to pay any attention to those speculations about the
origin of mankind which seem to conflict with the Sacred Record. But
perhaps there is some way of reconciling them, as there is of making the
seven days of creation harmonize with modern geology.  At least, these
speculations are curious enough in themselves; and I have seen so many
good and handsome children come of parents who were anything but virtuous
and comely, that I can believe in almost any amount of improvement taking
place in a tribe of living beings, if time and opportunity favor it.  I
have read in books of natural history that dogs came originally from
wolves.  When I remember my little Flora, who, as I used to think, could
do everything but talk, it does not seem to me that she was much nearer
her savage ancestors than some of the horrid cannibal wretches are to
their neighbors the great apes.

You see that I am tolerably liberal in my habit of looking at all these
questions.  We women drift along with the current of the times,
listening, in our quiet way, to the discussions going on round us in
books and in conversation, and shift the phrases in which we think and
talk with something of the same ease as that with which we change our
style of dress from year to year.  I doubt if you of the other sex know
what an effect this habit of accommodating our tastes to changing
standards has upon us.  Nothing is fixed in them, as you know; the very
law of fashion is change.  I suspect we learn from our dressmakers to
shift the costume of our minds, and slip on the new fashions of thinking
all the more easily because we have been accustomed to new styles of
dressing every season.

It frightens me to see how much I have written without having yet said a
word of what I began this letter on purpose to say.  I have taken so much
space in "defining my position," to borrow the politicians' phrase, that
I begin to fear you will be out of patience before you come to the part
of my letter I care most about your reading.

What I want to say is this.  When these matters are talked about before
persons of different ages and various shades of intelligence, I think one
ought to be very careful that his use of language does not injure the
sensibilities, perhaps blunt the reverential feelings, of those who are
listening to him.  You of the sterner sex say that we women have
intuitions, but not logic, as our birthright.  I shall not commit my sex
by conceding this to be true as a whole, but I will accept the first half
of it, and I will go so far as to say that we do not always care to
follow out a train of thought until it ends in a blind cul de sac, as
some of what are called the logical people are fond of doing.

Now I want to remind you that religion is not a matter of intellectual
luxury to those of us who are interested in it, but something very
different.  It is our life, and more than our life; for that is measured
by pulse-beats, but our religious consciousness partakes of the Infinite,
towards which it is constantly yearning. It is very possible that a
hundred or five hundred years from now the forms of religious belief may
be so altered that we should hardly know them.  But the sense of
dependence on Divine influence and the need of communion with the unseen
and eternal will be then just what they are now.  It is not the
geologist's hammer, or the astronomer's telescope, or the naturalist's
microscope, that is going to take away the need of the human soul for
that Rock to rest upon which is higher than itself, that Star which never
sets, that all-pervading Presence which gives life to all the least
moving atoms of the immeasurable universe.

I have no fears for myself, and listen very quietly to all your debates.
I go from your philosophical discussions to the reading of Jeremy
Taylor's "Rule and Exercises of Holy Dying" without feeling that I have
unfitted myself in the least degree for its solemn reflections.  And, as
I have mentioned his name, I cannot help saying that I do not believe
that good man himself would have ever shown the bitterness to those who
seem to be at variance with the received doctrines which one may see in
some of the newspapers that call themselves "religious."  I have kept a
few old books from my honored father's library, and among them is another
of his which I always thought had more true Christianity in its title
than there is in a good many whole volumes.  I am going to take the book
down, or up,--for it is not a little one,--and write out the title,
which, I dare say, you remember, and very likely you have the book.
"Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying, showing the Unreasonableness of
prescribing to other Men's Faith, and the Iniquity of persecuting
Different Opinions."

Now, my dear sir, I am sure you believe that I want to be liberal and
reasonable, and not to act like those weak alarmists who, whenever the
silly sheep begin to skip as if something was after them, and huddle
together in their fright, are sure there must be a bear or a lion coming
to eat them up.  But for all that, I want to beg you to handle some of
these points, which are so involved in the creed of a good many
well-intentioned persons that you cannot separate them from it without
picking their whole belief to pieces, with more thought for them than you
might think at first they were entitled to.  I have no doubt you
gentlemen are as wise as serpents, and I want you to be as harmless as
doves.

The Young Girl who sits by me has, I know, strong religious instincts.
Instead of setting her out to ask all sorts of questions, I would rather,
if I had my way, encourage her to form a habit of attending to religious
duties, and make the most of the simple faith in which she was bred.  I
think there are a good many questions young persons may safely postpone
to a more convenient season; and as this young creature is overworked, I
hate to have her excited by the fever of doubt which it cannot be denied
is largely prevailing in our time.

I know you must have looked on our other young friend, who has devoted
himself to the sublimest of the sciences, with as much interest as I do.
When I was a little girl I used to write out a line of Young's as a copy
in my writing-book,

     "An undevout astronomer is mad";

but I do not now feel quite so sure that the contemplation of all the
multitude of remote worlds does not tend to weaken the idea of a personal
Deity.  It is not so much that nebular theory which worries me, when I
think about this subject, as a kind of bewilderment when I try to
conceive of a consciousness filling all those frightful blanks of space
they talk about.  I sometimes doubt whether that young man worships
anything but the stars.  They tell me that many young students of science
like him never see the inside of a church.  I cannot help wishing they
did.  It humanizes people, quite apart from any higher influence it
exerts upon them.  One reason, perhaps, why they do not care to go to
places of worship is that they are liable to hear the questions they know
something about handled in sermons by those who know very much less about
them.  And so they lose a great deal.  Almost every human being, however
vague his notions of the Power addressed, is capable of being lifted and
solemnized by the exercise of public prayer.  When I was a young girl we
travelled in Europe, and I visited Ferney with my parents; and I remember
we all stopped before a chapel, and I read upon its front, I knew Latin
enough to understand it, I am pleased to say,--Deo erexit Voltaire. I
never forgot it; and knowing what a sad scoffer he was at most sacred
things, I could not but be impressed with the fact that even he was not
satisfied with himself, until he had shown his devotion in a public and
lasting form.

We all want religion sooner or later.  I am afraid there are some who
have no natural turn for it, as there are persons without an ear for
music, to which, if I remember right, I heard one of you comparing what
you called religious genius.  But sorrow and misery bring even these to
know what it means, in a great many instances.  May I not say to you, my
friend, that I am one who has learned the secret of the inner life by the
discipline of trials in the life of outward circumstance?  I can remember
the time when I thought more about the shade of color in a ribbon,
whether it matched my complexion or not, than I did about my spiritual
interests in this world or the next. It was needful that I should learn
the meaning of that text, "Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth."

Since I have been taught in the school of trial I have felt, as I never
could before, how precious an inheritance is the smallest patrimony of
faith.  When everything seemed gone from me, I found I had still one
possession.  The bruised reed that I had never leaned on became my staff.
The smoking flax which had been a worry to my eyes burst into flame, and
I lighted the taper at it which has since guided all my footsteps.  And I
am but one of the thousands who have had the same experience.  They have
been through the depths of affliction, and know the needs of the human
soul.  It will find its God in the unseen,--Father, Saviour, Divine
Spirit, Virgin Mother, it must and will breathe its longings and its
griefs into the heart of a Being capable of understanding all its
necessities and sympathizing with all its woes.

I am jealous, yes, I own I am jealous of any word, spoken or written,
that would tend to impair that birthright of reverence which becomes for
so many in after years the basis of a deeper religious sentiment. And
yet, as I have said, I cannot and will not shut my eyes to the problems
which may seriously affect our modes of conceiving the eternal truths on
which, and by which, our souls must live.  What a fearful time is this
into which we poor sensitive and timid creatures are born!  I suppose the
life of every century has more or less special resemblance to that of
some particular Apostle.  I cannot help thinking this century has Thomas
for its model.  How do you suppose the other Apostles felt when that
experimental philosopher explored the wounds of the Being who to them was
divine with his inquisitive forefinger?  In our time that finger has
multiplied itself into ten thousand thousand implements of research,
challenging all mysteries, weighing the world as in a balance, and
sifting through its prisms and spectroscopes the light that comes from
the throne of the Eternal.

Pity us, dear Lord, pity us!  The peace in believing which belonged to
other ages is not for us.  Again Thy wounds are opened that we may know
whether it is the blood of one like ourselves which flows from them, or
whether it is a Divinity that is bleeding for His creatures. Wilt Thou
not take the doubt of Thy children whom the time commands to try all
things in the place of the unquestioning faith of earlier and
simpler-hearted generations?  We too have need of Thee.  Thy martyrs in
other ages were cast into the flames, but no fire could touch their
immortal and indestructible faith.  We sit in safety and in peace, so far
as these poor bodies are concerned; but our cherished beliefs, the hopes,
the trust that stayed the hearts of those we loved who have gone before
us, are cast into the fiery furnace of an age which is fast turning to
dross the certainties and the sanctities once prized as our most precious
inheritance. You will understand me, my dear sir, and all my solicitudes
and apprehensions.  Had I never been assailed by the questions that meet
all thinking persons in our time, I might not have thought so anxiously
about the risk of perplexing others.  I know as well as you must that
there are many articles of belief clinging to the skirts of our time
which are the bequests of the ages of ignorance that God winked at.  But
for all that I would train a child in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, according to the simplest and best creed I could disentangle from
those barbarisms, and I would in every way try to keep up in young
persons that standard of reverence for all sacred subjects which may,
without any violent transition, grow and ripen into the devotion of later
years.  Believe me,

Very sincerely yours,

I have thought a good deal about this letter and the writer of it lately.
She seemed at first removed to a distance from all of us, but here I find
myself in somewhat near relations with her.  What has surprised me more
than that, however, is to find that she is becoming so much acquainted
with the Register of Deeds.  Of all persons in the world, I should least
have thought of him as like to be interested in her, and still less, if
possible, of her fancying him.  I can only say they have been in pretty
close conversation several times of late, and, if I dared to think it of
so very calm and dignified a personage, I should say that her color was a
little heightened after one or more of these interviews.  No! that would
be too absurd!  But I begin to think nothing is absurd in the matter of
the relations of the two sexes; and if this high-bred woman fancies the
attentions of a piece of human machinery like this elderly individual, it
is none of my business.

I have been at work on some more of the Young Astronomer's lines.  I find
less occasion for meddling with them as he grows more used to
versification.  I think I could analyze the processes going on in his
mind, and the conflict of instincts which he cannot in the nature of
things understand.  But it is as well to give the reader a chance to find
out for himself what is going on in the young man's heart and intellect.

          WIND-CLOUDS AND STAR-DRIFTS.

                    III

     The snows that glittered on the disk of Mars
     Have melted, and the planet's fiery orb
     Rolls in the crimson summer of its year;
     But what to me the summer or the snow
     Of worlds that throb with life in forms unknown,
     If life indeed be theirs; I heed not these.
     My heart is simply human; all my care
     For them whose dust is fashioned like mine own;
     These ache with cold and hunger, live in pain,
     And shake with fear of worlds more full of woe;
     There may be others worthier of my love,
     But such I know not save through these I know.

     There are two veils of language, hid beneath
     Whose sheltering folds, we dare to be ourselves;
     And not that other self which nods and smiles
     And babbles in our name; the one is Prayer,
     Lending its licensed freedom to the tongue
     That tells our sorrows and our sins to Heaven;
     The other, Verse, that throws its spangled web
     Around our naked speech and makes it bold.
     I, whose best prayer is silence; sitting dumb
     In the great temple where I nightly serve
     Him who is throned in light, have dared to claim
     The poet's franchise, though I may not hope
     To wear his garland; hear me while I tell
     My story in such form as poets use,
     But breathed in fitful whispers, as the wind
     Sighs and then slumbers, wakes and sighs again.

     Thou Vision, floating in the breathless air
     Between me and the fairest of the stars,
     I tell my lonely thoughts as unto thee.
     Look not for marvels of the scholar's pen
     In my rude measure; I can only show
     A slender-margined, unillumined page,
     And trust its meaning to the flattering eye
     That reads it in the gracious light of love.
     Ah, wouldst thou clothe thyself in breathing shape
     And nestle at my side, my voice should lend
     Whate'er my verse may lack of tender rhythm
     To make thee listen.

                          I have stood entranced
     When, with her fingers wandering o'er the keys,
     The white enchantress with the golden hair
     Breathed all her soul through some unvalued rhyme;
     Some flower of song that long had lost its bloom;
     Lo! its dead summer kindled as she sang!
     The sweet contralto, like the ringdove's coo,
     Thrilled it with brooding, fond, caressing tones,
     And the pale minstrel's passion lived again,
     Tearful and trembling as a dewy rose
     The wind has shaken till it fills the air
     With light and fragrance.  Such the wondrous charm
     A song can borrow when the bosom throbs
     That lends it breath.

                           So from the poet's lips
     His verse sounds doubly sweet, for none like him
     Feels every cadence of its wave-like flow;
     He lives the passion over, while he reads,
     That shook him as he sang his lofty strain,
     And pours his life through each resounding line,
     As ocean, when the stormy winds are hushed,
     Still rolls and thunders through his billowy caves.

     Let me retrace the record of the years
     That made me what I am.  A man most wise,
     But overworn with toil and bent with age,
     Sought me to be his scholar,--me, run wild
     From books and teachers,--kindled in my soul
     The love of knowledge; led me to his tower,
     Showed me the wonders of the midnight realm
     His hollow sceptre ruled, or seemed to rule,
     Taught me the mighty secrets of the spheres,
     Trained me to find the glimmering specks of light
     Beyond the unaided sense, and on my chart
     To string them one by one, in order due,
     As on a rosary a saint his beads.

     I was his only scholar; I became
     The echo to his thought; whate'er he knew
     Was mine for asking; so from year to year
     We wrought together, till there came a time
     When I, the learner, was the master half
     Of the twinned being in the dome-crowned tower.

     Minds roll in paths like planets; they revolve
     This in a larger, that a narrower ring,
     But round they come at last to that same phase,
     That self-same light and shade they showed before.
     I learned his annual and his monthly tale,
     His weekly axiom and his daily phrase,
     I felt them coming in the laden air,
     And watched them laboring up to vocal breath,
     Even as the first-born at his father's board
     Knows ere he speaks the too familiar jest
     Is on its way, by some mysterious sign
     Forewarned, the click before the striking bell.

     He shrivelled as I spread my growing leaves,
     Till trust and reverence changed to pitying care;
     He lived for me in what he once had been,
     But I for him, a shadow, a defence,
     The guardian of his fame, his guide, his staff,
     Leaned on so long he fell if left alone.
     I was his eye, his ear, his cunning hand,
     Love was my spur and longing after fame,
     But his the goading thorn of sleepless age
     That sees its shortening span, its lengthening shades,
     That clutches what it may with eager grasp,
     And drops at last with empty, outstretched hands.

     All this he dreamed not.  He would sit him down
     Thinking to work his problems as of old,
     And find the star he thought so plain a blur,
     The columned figures labyrinthine wilds
     Without my comment, blind and senseless scrawls
     That vexed him with their riddles; he would strive
     And struggle for a while, and then his eye
     Would lose its light, and over all his mind
     The cold gray mist would settle; and erelong
     The darkness fell, and I was left alone.

     Alone! no climber of an Alpine cliff,
     No Arctic venturer on the waveless sea,
     Feels the dread stillness round him as it chills
     The heart of him who leaves the slumbering earth
     To watch the silent worlds that crowd the sky.

     Alone!  And as the shepherd leaves his flock
     To feed upon the hillside, he meanwhile
     Finds converse in the warblings of the pipe
     Himself has fashioned for his vacant hour,
     So have I grown companion to myself,
     And to the wandering spirits of the air
     That smile and whisper round us in our dreams.
     Thus have I learned to search if I may know
     The whence and why of all beneath the stars
     And all beyond them, and to weigh my life
     As in a balance, poising good and ill
     Against each other,-asking of the Power
     That flung me forth among the whirling worlds,
     If I am heir to any inborn right,
     Or only as an atom of the dust
     That every wind may blow where'er it will.

     I am not humble; I was shown my place,
     Clad in such robes as Nature had at hand;
     Took what she gave, not chose; I know no shame,
     No fear for being simply what I am.
     I am not proud, I hold my every breath
     At Nature's mercy.  I am as a babe
     Borne in a giant's arms, he knows not where;
     Each several heart-beat, counted like the coin
     A miser reckons, is a special gift
     As from an unseen hand; if that withhold
     Its bounty for a moment, I am left
     A clod upon the earth to which I fall.

     Something I find in me that well might claim
     The love of beings in a sphere above
     This doubtful twilight world of right and wrong;
     Something that shows me of the self-same clay
     That creeps or swims or flies in humblest form.
     Had I been asked, before I left my bed
     Of shapeless dust, what clothing I would wear,
     I would have said, More angel and less worm;
     But for their sake who are even such as I,
     Of the same mingled blood, I would not choose
     To hate that meaner portion of myself
     Which makes me brother to the least of men.

     I dare not be a coward with my lips
     Who dare to question all things in my soul;
     Some men may find their wisdom on their knees,
     Some prone and grovelling in the dust like slaves;
     Let the meek glow-worm glisten in the dew;
     I ask to lift my taper to the sky
     As they who hold their lamps above their heads,
     Trusting the larger currents up aloft,
     Rather than crossing eddies round their breast,
     Threatening with every puff the flickering blaze.

     My life shall be a challenge, not a truce!
     This is my homage to the mightier powers,
     To ask my boldest question, undismayed
     By muttered threats that some hysteric sense
     Of wrong or insult will convulse the throne
     Where wisdom reigns supreme; and if I err,
     They all must err who have to feel their way
     As bats that fly at noon; for what are we
     But creatures of the night, dragged forth by day,
     Who needs must stumble, and with stammering steps
     Spell out their paths in syllables of pain?

     Thou wilt not hold in scorn the child who dares
     Look up to Thee, the Father,--dares to ask
     More than Thy wisdom answers.  From Thy hand
     The worlds were cast; yet every leaflet claims
     From that same hand its little shining sphere
     Of star-lit dew; thine image, the great sun,
     Girt with his mantle of tempestuous flame,

     Glares in mid-heaven; but to his noontide blaze
     The slender violet lifts its lidless eye,
     And from his splendor steals its fairest hue,
     Its sweetest perfume from his scorching fire.

I may just as well stop here as anywhere, for there is more of the
manuscript to come, and I can only give it in instalments.

The Young Astronomer had told me I might read any portions of his
manuscript I saw fit to certain friends.  I tried this last extract on
the old Master.

It's the same story we all have to tell,--said he, when I had done
reading.---We are all asking questions nowadays.  I should like to hear
him read some of his verses himself, and I think some of the other
boarders would like to.  I wonder if he wouldn't do it, if we asked him!
Poets read their own compositions in a singsong sort of way; but they do
seem to love 'em so, that I always enjoy it.  It makes me laugh a little
inwardly to see how they dandle their poetical babies, but I don't let
them know it.  We must get up a select party of the boarders to hear him
read.  We'll send him a regular invitation.  I will put my name at the
head of it, and you shall write it.

--That was neatly done.  How I hate writing such things!  But I suppose I
must do it.




VIII

The Master and I had been thinking for some time of trying to get the
Young Astronomer round to our side of the table.  There are many subjects
on which both of us like to talk with him, and it would be convenient to
have him nearer to us.  How to manage it was not quite so clear as it
might have been.  The Scarabee wanted to sit with his back to the light,
as it was in his present position.  He used his eyes so much in studying
minute objects, that he wished to spare them all fatigue, and did not
like facing a window.  Neither of us cared to ask the Man of Letters, so
called, to change his place, and of course we could not think of making
such a request of the Young Girl or the Lady.  So we were at a stand with
reference to this project of ours.

But while we were proposing, Fate or Providence disposed everything for
us.  The Man of Letters, so called, was missing one morning, having
folded his tent--that is, packed his carpet-bag--with the silence of the
Arabs, and encamped--that is, taken lodgings--in some locality which he
had forgotten to indicate.

The Landlady bore this sudden bereavement remarkably well.  Her remarks
and reflections; though borrowing the aid of homely imagery and doing
occasional violence to the nicer usages of speech, were not without
philosophical discrimination.

--I like a gentleman that is a gentleman.  But there's a difference in
what folks call gentlemen as there is in what you put on table. There is
cabbages and there is cauliflowers.  There is clams and there is oysters.
There is mackerel and there is salmon.  And there is some that knows the
difference and some that doos n't.  I had a little account with that
boarder that he forgot to settle before he went off, so all of a suddin.
I sha'n't say anything about it.  I've seen the time when I should have
felt bad about losing what he owed me, but it was no great matter; and if
he 'll only stay away now he 's gone, I can stand losing it, and not cry
my eyes out nor lay awake all night neither.  I never had ought to have
took him.  Where he come from and where he's gone to is unbeknown to me.
If he'd only smoked good tobacco, I wouldn't have said a word; but it was
such dreadful stuff, it 'll take a week to get his chamber sweet enough
to show them that asks for rooms.  It doos smell like all possest.

--Left any goods?--asked the Salesman.

--Or dockermunts?--added the Member of the Haouse.

The Landlady answered with a faded smile, which implied that there was no
hope in that direction.  Dr. Benjamin, with a sudden recurrence of
youthful feeling, made a fan with the fingers of his right hand, the
second phalanx of the thumb resting on the tip of the nose, and the
remaining digits diverging from each other, in the plane of the median
line of the face,--I suppose this is the way he would have described the
gesture, which is almost a specialty of the Parisian gamin.  That Boy
immediately copied it, and added greatly to its effect by extending the
fingers of the other hand in a line with those of the first, and
vigorously agitating those of the two hands,--a gesture which acts like
a puncture on the distended self-esteem of one to whom it is addressed,
and cheapens the memory of the absent to a very low figure.

I wish the reader to observe that I treasure up with interest all the
words uttered by the Salesman.  It must have been noticed that he very
rarely speaks.  Perhaps he has an inner life, with its own deep
emotional, and lofty contemplative elements, but as we see him, he is the
boarder reduced to the simplest expression of that term.  Yet, like most
human creatures, he has generic and specific characters not unworthy of
being studied.  I notice particularly a certain electrical briskness of
movement, such as one may see in a squirrel, which clearly belongs to his
calling.  The dry-goodsman's life behind his counter is a succession of
sudden, snappy perceptions and brief series of coordinate spasms; as
thus:

"Purple calico, three quarters wide, six yards."

Up goes the arm; bang! tumbles out the flat roll and turns half a dozen
somersets, as if for the fun of the thing; the six yards of calico hurry
over the measuring nails, hunching their backs up, like six cankerworms;
out jump the scissors; snip, clip, rip; the stuff is wisped up,
brown--papered, tied, labelled, delivered, and the man is himself again,
like a child just come out of a convulsion-fit.  Think of a man's having
some hundreds of these semi-epileptic seizures every day, and you need
not wonder that he does not say much; these fits take the talk all out of
him.

But because he, or any other man, does not say much, it does not follow
that he may not have, as I have said, an exalted and intense inner life.
I have known a number of cases where a man who seemed thoroughly
commonplace and unemotional has all at once surprised everybody by
telling the story of his hidden life far more pointedly and dramatically
than any playwright or novelist or poet could have told it for him.  I
will not insult your intelligence, Beloved, by saying how he has told it.

--We had been talking over the subjects touched upon in the Lady's
letter.

--I suppose one man in a dozen--said the Master--ought to be born a
skeptic.  That was the proportion among the Apostles, at any rate.

--So there was one Judas among them,--I remarked.

--Well,--said the Master,--they 've been whitewashing Judas of late. But
never mind him.  I did not say there was not one rogue on the average
among a dozen men.  I don't see how that would interfere with my
proposition.  If I say that among a dozen men you ought to find one that
weighs over a hundred and fifty pounds, and you tell me that there were
twelve men in your club, and one of 'em had red hair, I don't see that
you have materially damaged my statement.

--I thought it best to let the old Master have his easy victory, which
was more apparent than real, very evidently, and he went on.

--When the Lord sends out a batch of human beings, say a hundred--Did you
ever read my book, the new edition of it, I mean?

It is rather awkward to answer such a question in the negative, but I
said, with the best grace I could, "No, not the last edition."

--Well, I must give you a copy of it.  My book and I are pretty much the
same thing.  Sometimes I steal from my book in my talk without mentioning
it, and then I say to myself, "Oh, that won't do; everybody has read my
book and knows it by heart."  And then the other I says,--you know there
are two of us, right and left, like a pair of shoes,--the other I says,
"You're a--something or other--fool.  They have n't read your confounded
old book; besides, if they have, they have forgotten all about it."
Another time, I say, thinking I will be very honest, "I have said
something about that in my book"; and then the other I says, "What a
Balaam's quadruped you are to tell 'em it's in your book; they don't care
whether it is or not, if it's anything worth saying; and if it isn't
worth saying, what are you braying for?"  That is a rather sensible
fellow, that other chap we talk with, but an impudent whelp.  I never got
such abuse from any blackguard in my life as I have from that No. 2 of
me, the one that answers the other's questions and makes the comments,
and does what in demotic phrase is called the "sarsing."

--I laughed at that.  I have just such a fellow always with me, as wise
as Solomon, if I would only heed him; but as insolent as Shimei, cursing,
and throwing stones and dirt, and behaving as if he had the traditions of
the "ape-like human being" born with him rather than civilized instincts.
One does not have to be a king to know what it is to keep a king's
jester.

--I mentioned my book,--the Master said, because I have something in it
on the subject we were talking about.  I should like to read you a
passage here and there out of it, where I have expressed myself a little
more freely on some of those matters we handle in conversation.  If you
don't quarrel with it, I must give you a copy of the book.  It's a rather
serious thing to get a copy of a book from the writer of it.  It has made
my adjectives sweat pretty hard, I know, to put together an answer
returning thanks and not lying beyond the twilight of veracity, if one
may use a figure.  Let me try a little of my book on you, in divided
doses, as my friends the doctors say.

-Fiat experimentum in corpore vili,--I said, laughing at my own expense.
I don't doubt the medicament is quite as good as the patient deserves,
and probably a great deal better,--I added, reinforcing my feeble
compliment.

[When you pay a compliment to an author, don't qualify it in the next
sentence so as to take all the goodness out of it.  Now I am thinking of
it, I will give you one or two pieces of advice.  Be careful to assure
yourself that the person you are talking with wrote the article or book
you praise.  It is not very pleasant to be told, "Well, there, now!  I
always liked your writings, but you never did anything half so good as
this last piece," and then to have to tell the blunderer that this last
piece is n't yours, but t' other man's. Take care that the phrase or
sentence you commend is not one that is in quotation-marks.  "The best
thing in your piece, I think, is a line I do not remember meeting before;
it struck me as very true and well expressed:

"'An honest man's the noblest work of God.'

"But, my dear lady, that line is one which is to be found in a writer of
the last century, and not original with me."  One ought not to have
undeceived her, perhaps, but one is naturally honest, and cannot bear to
be credited with what is not his own.  The lady blushes, of course, and
says she has not read much ancient literature, or some such thing.  The
pearl upon the Ethiop's arm is very pretty in verse, but one does not
care to furnish the dark background for other persons' jewelry.]

I adjourned from the table in company with the old Master to his
apartments.  He was evidently in easy circumstances, for he had the best
accommodations the house afforded.  We passed through a reception room to
his library, where everything showed that he had ample means for
indulging the modest tastes of a scholar.

--The first thing, naturally, when one enters a scholar's study or
library, is to look at his books.  One gets a notion very speedily of his
tastes and the range of his pursuits by a glance round his bookshelves.

Of course, you know there are many fine houses where the library is a
part of the upholstery, so to speak.  Books in handsome binding kept
locked under plate-glass in showy dwarf bookcases are as important to
stylish establishments as servants in livery; who sit with folded arms,
are to stylish equipages.  I suppose those wonderful statues with the
folded arms do sometimes change their attitude, and I suppose those books
with the gilded backs do sometimes get opened, but it is nobody's
business whether they do or not, and it is not best to ask too many
questions.

This sort of thing is common enough, but there is another case that may
prove deceptive if you undertake to judge from appearances.  Once in a
while you will come on a house where you will find a family of readers
and almost no library.  Some of the most indefatigable devourers of
literature have very few books.  They belong to book clubs, they haunt
the public libraries, they borrow of friends, and somehow or other get
hold of everything they want, scoop out all it holds for them, and have
done with it.  When I want a book, it is as a tiger wants a sheep.  I
must have it with one spring, and, if I miss it, go away defeated and
hungry.  And my experience with public libraries is that the first volume
of the book I inquire for is out, unless I happen to want the second,
when that is out.

--I was pretty well prepared to understand the Master's library and his
account of it.  We seated ourselves in two very comfortable chairs, and I
began the conversation.

-I see you have a large and rather miscellaneous collection of books. Did
you get them together by accident or according to some preconceived plan?

--Both, sir, both,--the Master answered.  When Providence throws a good
book in my way, I bow to its decree and purchase it as an act of piety,
if it is reasonably or unreasonably cheap.  I adopt a certain number of
books every year, out of a love for the foundlings and stray children of
other people's brains that nobody seems to care for.  Look here.

He took down a Greek Lexicon finely bound in calf, and spread it open.

Do you see that Hedericus?  I had Greek dictionaries enough and to spare,
but I saw that noble quarto lying in the midst of an ignoble crowd of
cheap books, and marked with a price which I felt to be an insult to
scholarship, to the memory of Homer, sir, and the awful shade of
AEschylus.  I paid the mean price asked for it, and I wanted to double
it, but I suppose it would have been a foolish sacrifice of coin to
sentiment: I love that book for its looks and behavior.  None of your
"half-calf" economies in that volume, sir!  And see how it lies open
anywhere!  There is n't a book in my library that has such a generous way
of laying its treasures before you.  From Alpha to Omega, calm, assured
rest at any page that your choice or accident may light on.  No lifting
of a rebellious leaf like an upstart servant that does not know his place
and can never be taught manners, but tranquil, well-bred repose.  A book
may be a perfect gentleman in its aspect and demeanor, and this book
would be good company for personages like Roger Ascham and his pupils the
Lady Elizabeth and the Lady Jane Grey.

The Master was evidently riding a hobby, and what I wanted to know was
the plan on which he had formed his library.  So I brought him back to
the point by asking him the question in so many words.

Yes,--he said,--I have a kind of notion of the way in which a library
ought to be put together--no, I don't mean that, I mean ought to grow.  I
don't pretend to say that mine is a model, but it serves my turn well
enough, and it represents me pretty accurately.  A scholar must shape his
own shell, secrete it one might almost say, for secretion is only
separation, you know, of certain elements derived from the materials of
the world about us.  And a scholar's study, with the books lining its
walls, is his shell.  It is n't a mollusk's shell, either; it 's a
caddice-worm's shell.  You know about the caddice-worm?

--More or less; less rather than more,--was my humble reply.

Well, sir, the caddice-worm is the larva of a fly, and he makes a case
for himself out of all sorts of bits of everything that happen to suit
his particular fancy, dead or alive, sticks and stones and small shells
with their owners in 'em, living as comfortable as ever. Every one of
these caddice-worms has his special fancy as to what he will pick up and
glue together, with a kind of natural cement he provides himself, to make
his case out of.  In it he lives, sticking his head and shoulders out
once in a while, that is all.  Don't you see that a student in his
library is a caddice-worm in his case? I've told you that I take an
interest in pretty much everything, and don't mean to fence out any human
interests from the private grounds of my intelligence.  Then, again,
there is a subject, perhaps I may say there is more than one, that I want
to exhaust, to know to the very bottom.  And besides, of course I must
have my literary harem, my pare aux cerfs, where my favorites await my
moments of leisure and pleasure,--my scarce and precious editions, my
luxurious typographical masterpieces; my Delilahs, that take my head in
their lap: the pleasant story-tellers and the like; the books I love
because they are fair to look upon, prized by collectors, endeared by old
associations, secret treasures that nobody else knows anything about;
books, in short, that I like for insufficient reasons it may be, but
peremptorily, and mean to like and to love and to cherish till death us
do part.

Don't you see I have given you a key to the way my library is made up, so
that you can apriorize the plan according to which I have filled my
bookcases?  I will tell you how it is carried out.

In the first place, you see, I have four extensive cyclopaedias.  Out of
these I can get information enough to serve my immediate purpose on
almost any subject.  These, of course, are supplemented by geographical,
biographical, bibliographical, and other dictionaries, including of
course lexicons to all the languages I ever meddle with. Next to these
come the works relating to my one or two specialties, and these
collections I make as perfect as I can.  Every library should try to be
complete on something, if it were only on the history of pin-heads.  I
don't mean that I buy all the trashy compilations on my special subjects,
but I try to have all the works of any real importance relating to them,
old as well as new.  In the following compartment you will find the great
authors in all the languages I have mastered, from Homer and Hesiod
downward to the last great English name.

This division, you see, you can make almost as extensive or as limited as
you choose.  You can crowd the great representative writers into a small
compass; or you can make a library consisting only of the different
editions of Horace, if you have space and money enough.  Then comes the
Harem, the shelf or the bookcase of Delilahs, that you have paid wicked
prices for, that you love without pretending to be reasonable about it,
and would bag in case of fire before all the rest, just as Mr.  Townley
took the Clytie to his carriage when the anti-Catholic mob threatened his
house in 1780.  As for the foundlings like my Hedericus, they go among
their peers; it is a pleasure to take them, from the dusty stall where
they were elbowed by plebeian school-books and battered odd volumes, and
give them Alduses and Elzevirs for companions.

Nothing remains but the Infirmary.  The most painful subjects are the
unfortunates that have lost a cover.  Bound a hundred years ago, perhaps,
and one of the rich old browned covers gone--what a pity! Do you know
what to do about it?  I 'll tell you,--no, I 'll show you.  Look at this
volume.  M. T.  Ciceronis Opera,--a dozen of 'em,--one of 'em minus half
his cover, a poor one-legged cripple, six months ago,--now see him.

--He looked very respectably indeed, both covers dark, ancient, very
decently matched; one would hardly notice the fact that they were not
twins.

-I 'll tell you what I did.  You poor devil, said I, you are a disgrace
to your family.  We must send you to a surgeon and have some kind of a
Taliacotian operation performed on you.  (You remember the operation as
described in Hudibras, of course.) The first thing was to find a subject
of similar age and aspect ready to part with one of his members.  So I
went to Quidlibet's,--you know Quidlibet and that hieroglyphic sign of
his with the omniscient-looking eye as its most prominent feature,--and
laid my case before him.  I want you, said I, to look up an old book of
mighty little value,--one of your ten-cent vagabonds would be the sort of
thing,--but an old beggar, with a cover like this, and lay it by for me.

And Quidlibet, who is a pleasant body to deal with,--only he has insulted
one or two gentlemanly books by selling them to me at very low-bred and
shamefully insufficient prices,--Quidlibet, I say, laid by three old
books for me to help myself from, and did n't take the trouble even to
make me pay the thirty cents for 'em.  Well, said I to myself, let us
look at our three books that have undergone the last insult short of the
trunkmaker's or the paper-mills, and see what they are.  There may be
something worth looking at in one or the other of 'em.

Now do you know it was with a kind of a tremor that I untied the package
and looked at these three unfortunates, too humble for the companionable
dime to recognize as its equal in value.  The same sort of feeling you
know if you ever tried the Bible-and-key, or the Sortes Virgiliance.  I
think you will like to know what the three books were which had been
bestowed upon me gratis, that I might tear away one of the covers of the
one that best matched my Cicero, and give it to the binder to cobble my
crippled volume with.

The Master took the three books from a cupboard and continued.

No. I.  An odd volume of The Adventurer.  It has many interesting things
enough, but is made precious by containing Simon Browne's famous
Dedication to the Queen of his Answer to Tindal's "Christianity as old as
the Creation." Simon Browne was the Man without a Soul.  An excellent
person, a most worthy dissenting minister, but lying under a strange
delusion.

Here is a paragraph from his Dedication:

"He was once a man; and of some little name; but of no worth, as his
present unparalleled case makes but too manifest; for by the immediate
hand of an avenging GOD, his very thinking substance has, for more than
seven years, been continually wasting away, till it is wholly perished
out of him, if it be not utterly come to nothing. None, no, not the least
remembrance of its very ruins, remains, not the shadow of an idea is
left, nor any sense that so much as one single one, perfect or imperfect,
whole or diminished, ever did appear to a mind within him, or was
perceived by it."

Think of this as the Dedication of a book "universally allowed to be the
best which that controversy produced," and what a flood of light it pours
on the insanities of those self-analyzing diarists whose morbid reveries
have been so often mistaken for piety!  No. I. had something for me,
then, besides the cover, which was all it claimed to have worth offering.

No. II. was "A View of Society and Manners in Italy."  Vol. III. By John
Moore, M. D.  (Zeluco Moore.) You know his pleasant book.  In this
particular volume what interested me most, perhaps, was the very spirited
and intelligent account of the miracle of the liquefaction of the blood
of Saint Januarius, but it gave me an hour's mighty agreeable reading.
So much for Number Two.

No. III.  was "An ESSAY On the Great EFFECTS of Even Languid and Unheeded
LOCAL MOTION."  By the Hon. Robert Boyle.  Published in 1685, and, as
appears from other sources, "received with great and general applause."
I confess I was a little startled to find how near this earlier
philosopher had come to the modern doctrines, such as are illustrated in
Tyndall's "Heat considered as a Mode of Motion."  He speaks of "Us, who
endeavor to resolve the Phenomena of Nature into Matter and Local
motion."  That sounds like the nineteenth century, but what shall we say
to this?  "As when a bar of iron or silver, having been well hammered, is
newly taken off of the anvil; though the eye can discern no motion in it,
yet the touch will readily perceive it to be very hot, and if you spit
upon it, the brisk agitation of the insensible parts will become visible
in that which they will produce in the liquor."  He takes a bar of tin,
and tries whether by bending it to and fro two or three times he cannot
"procure a considerable internal commotion among the parts "; and having
by this means broken or cracked it in the middle, finds, as he expected,
that the middle parts had considerably heated each other. There are many
other curious and interesting observations in the volume which I should
like to tell you of, but these will serve my purpose.

--Which book furnished you the old cover you wanted?--said I.

--Did he kill the owl?--said the Master, laughing.  [I suppose you, the
reader, know the owl story.]--It was Number Two that lent me one of his
covers.  Poor wretch!  He was one of three, and had lost his two
brothers.  From him that hath not shall be taken even that which he hath.
The Scripture had to be fulfilled in his case.  But I couldn't help
saying to myself, What do you keep writing books for, when the stalls are
covered all over with 'em, good books, too, that nobody will give ten
cents apiece for, lying there like so many dead beasts of burden, of no
account except to strip off their hides? What is the use, I say?  I have
made a book or two in my time, and I am making another that perhaps will
see the light one of these days. But if I had my life to live over again,
I think I should go in for silence, and get as near to Nirvana as I
could.  This language is such a paltry tool!  The handle of it cuts and
the blade doesn't. You muddle yourself by not knowing what you mean by a
word, and send out your unanswered riddles and rebuses to clear up other
people's difficulties.  It always seems to me that talk is a ripple and
thought is a ground swell.  A string of words, that mean pretty much
anything, helps you in a certain sense to get hold of a thought, just as
a string of syllables that mean nothing helps you to a word; but it's a
poor business, it's a poor business, and the more you study definition
the more you find out how poor it is.  Do you know I sometimes think our
little entomological neighbor is doing a sounder business than we people
that make books about ourselves and our slippery abstractions?  A man can
see the spots on a bug and count 'em, and tell what their color is, and
put another bug alongside of him and see whether the two are alike or
different.  And when he uses a word he knows just what he means.  There
is no mistake as to the meaning and identity of pulex irritans, confound
him!

--What if we should look in, some day, on the Scarabeeist, as he calls
himself?--said I.---The fact is the Master had got agoing at such a rate
that I was willing to give a little turn to the conversation.

--Oh, very well,--said the Master,--I had some more things to say, but I
don't doubt they'll keep.  And besides, I take an interest in entomology,
and have my own opinion on the meloe question.

--You don't mean to say you have studied insects as well as solar systems
and the order of things generally?

--He looked pleased.  All philosophers look pleased when people say to
them virtually, "Ye are gods."  The Master says he is vain
constitutionally, and thanks God that he is.  I don't think he has enough
vanity to make a fool of himself with it, but the simple truth is he
cannot help knowing that he has a wide and lively intelligence, and it
pleases him to know it, and to be reminded of it, especially in an
oblique and tangential sort of way, so as not to look like downright
flattery.

Yes, yes, I have amused a summer or two with insects, among other things.
I described a new tabanus,--horsefly, you know,--which, I think, had
escaped notice.  I felt as grand when I showed up my new discovery as if
I had created the beast.  I don't doubt Herschel felt as if he had made a
planet when he first showed the astronomers Georgium Sidus, as he called
it.  And that reminds me of something. I was riding on the outside of a
stagecoach from London to Windsor in the year--never mind the year, but
it must have been in June, I suppose, for I bought some strawberries.
England owes me a sixpence with interest from date, for I gave the woman
a shilling, and the coach contrived to start or the woman timed it so
that I just missed getting my change.  What an odd thing memory is, to be
sure, to have kept such a triviality, and have lost so much that was
invaluable! She is a crazy wench, that Mnemosyne; she throws her jewels
out of the window and locks up straws and old rags in her strong box.

[De profundis! said I to myself, the bottom of the bushel has dropped
out!  Sancta--Maria, ora pro nobis!]

--But as I was saying, I was riding on the outside of a stage-coach from
London to Windsor, when all at once a picture familiar to me from my New
England village childhood came upon me like a reminiscence rather than a
revelation.  It was a mighty bewilderment of slanted masts and spars and
ladders and ropes, from the midst of which a vast tube, looking as if it
might be a piece of ordnance such as the revolted angels battered the
walls of Heaven with, according to Milton, lifted its muzzle defiantly
towards the sky.  Why, you blessed old rattletrap, said I to myself, I
know you as well as I know my father's spectacles and snuff-box!  And
that same crazy witch of a Memory, so divinely wise and foolish, travels
thirty-five hundred miles or so in a single pulse-beat, makes straight
for an old house and an old library and an old corner of it, and whisks
out a volume of an old cyclopaedia, and there is the picture of which
this is the original.  Sir William Herschel's great telescope!  It was
just about as big, as it stood there by the roadside, as it was in the
picture, not much different any way.  Why should it be?  The pupil of
your eye is only a gimlet-hole, not so very much bigger than the eye of a
sail-needle, and a camel has to go through it before you can see him.
You look into a stereoscope and think you see a miniature of a building
or a mountain; you don't, you 're made a fool of by your lying
intelligence, as you call it; you see the building and the mountain just
as large as with your naked eye looking straight at the real objects.
Doubt it, do you?  Perhaps you'd like to doubt it to the music of a
couple of gold five-dollar pieces.  If you would, say the word, and man
and money, as Messrs. Heenan and Morrissey have it, shall be forthcoming;
for I will make you look at a real landscape with your right eye, and a
stereoscopic view of it with your left eye, both at once, and you can
slide one over the other by a little management and see how exactly the
picture overlies the true landscape.  We won't try it now, because I want
to read you something out of my book.

--I have noticed that the Master very rarely fails to come back to his
original proposition, though he, like myself, is fond of zigzagging in
order to reach it.  Men's minds are like the pieces on a chess-board in
their way of moving.  One mind creeps from the square it is on to the
next, straight forward, like the pawns. Another sticks close to its own
line of thought and follows it as far as it goes, with no heed for
others' opinions, as the bishop sweeps the board in the line of his own
color.  And another class of minds break through everything that lies
before them, ride over argument and opposition, and go to the end of the
board, like the castle.  But there is still another sort of intellect
which is very apt to jump over the thought that stands next and come down
in the unexpected way of the knight.  But that same knight, as the chess
manuals will show you, will contrive to get on to every square of the
board in a pretty series of moves that looks like a pattern of
embroidery, and so these zigzagging minds like the Master's, and I
suppose my own is something like it, will sooner or later get back to the
square next the one they started from.

The Master took down a volume from one of the shelves.  I could not help
noticing that it was a shelf near his hand as he sat, and that the volume
looked as if he had made frequent use of it.  I saw, too, that he handled
it in a loving sort of way; the tenderness he would have bestowed on a
wife and children had to find a channel somewhere, and what more natural
than that he should look fondly on the volume which held the thoughts
that had rolled themselves smooth and round in his mind like pebbles on a
beach, the dreams which, under cover of the simple artifices such as all
writers use, told the little world of readers his secret hopes and
aspirations, the fancies which had pleased him and which he could not
bear to let die without trying to please others with them?  I have a
great sympathy with authors, most of all with unsuccessful ones.  If one
had a dozen lives or so, it would all be very well, but to have only a
single ticket in the great lottery, and have that drawn a blank, is a
rather sad sort of thing. So I was pleased to see the affectionate kind
of pride with which the Master handled his book; it was a success, in its
way, and he looked on it with a cheerful sense that he had a right to be
proud of it. The Master opened the volume, and, putting on his large
round glasses, began reading, as authors love to read that love their
books.

--The only good reason for believing in the stability of the moral order
of things is to be found in the tolerable steadiness of human averages.
Out of a hundred human beings fifty-one will be found in the long run on
the side of the right, so far as they know it, and against the wrong.
They will be organizers rather than disorganizers, helpers and not
hinderers in the upward movement of the race.  This is the main fact we
have to depend on.  The right hand of the great organism is a little
stronger than the left, that is all.

Now and then we come across a left-handed man.  So now and then we find a
tribe or a generation, the subject of what we may call moral
left-handedness, but that need not trouble us about our formula.  All we
have to do is to spread the average over a wider territory or a longer
period of time.  Any race or period that insists on being left-handed
must go under if it comes in contact with a right-handed one.  If there
were, as a general rule, fifty-one rogues in the hundred instead of
forty-nine, all other qualities of mind and body being equally
distributed between the two sections, the order of things would sooner or
later end in universal disorder.  It is the question between the leak and
the pumps.

It does not seem very likely that the Creator of all things is taken by
surprise at witnessing anything any of his creatures do or think. Men
have sought out many inventions, but they can have contrived nothing
which did not exist as an idea in the omniscient consciousness to which
past, present, and future are alike Now.

We read what travellers tell us about the King of Dahomey, or the Fejee
Island people, or the short and simple annals of the celebrities recorded
in the Newgate Calendar, and do not know just what to make of these
brothers and sisters of the race; but I do not suppose an intelligence
even as high as the angelic beings, to stop short there, would see
anything very peculiar or wonderful about them, except as everything is
wonderful and unlike everything else.

It is very curious to see how science, that is, looking at and arranging
the facts of a case with our own eyes and our own intelligence, without
minding what somebody else has said, or how some old majority vote went
in a pack of intriguing ecclesiastics,--I say it is very curious to see
how science is catching up with one superstition after another.

There is a recognized branch of science familiar to all those who know
anything of the studies relating to life, under the name of Teratology.
It deals with all sorts of monstrosities which are to be met with in
living beings, and more especially in animals.  It is found that what
used to be called lusus naturae, or freaks of nature, are just as much
subject to laws as the naturally developed forms of living creatures.

The rustic looks at the Siamese twins, and thinks he is contemplating an
unheard-of anomaly; but there are plenty of cases like theirs in the
books of scholars, and though they are not quite so common as double
cherries, the mechanism of their formation is not a whit more mysterious
than that of the twinned fruits.  Such cases do not disturb the average
arrangement; we have Changs and Engs at one pole, and Cains and Abels at
the other.  One child is born with six fingers on each hand, and another
falls short by one or more fingers of his due allowance; but the glover
puts his faith in the great law of averages, and makes his gloves with
five fingers apiece, trusting nature for their counterparts.

Thinking people are not going to be scared out of explaining or at least
trying to explain things by the shrieks of persons whose beliefs are
disturbed thereby.  Comets were portents to Increase Mather, President of
Harvard College; "preachers of Divine wrath, heralds and messengers of
evil tidings to the world."  It is not so very long since Professor
Winthrop was teaching at the same institution.  I can remember two of his
boys very well, old boys, it is true, they were, and one of them wore a
three-cornered cocked hat; but the father of these boys, whom, as I say,
I can remember, had to defend himself against the minister of the Old
South Church for the impiety of trying to account for earthquakes on
natural principles. And his ancestor, Governor Winthrop, would probably
have shaken his head over his descendant's dangerous audacity, if one may
judge by the solemn way in which he mentions poor Mrs. Hutchinson's
unpleasant experience, which so grievously disappointed her maternal
expectations.  But people used always to be terribly frightened by those
irregular vital products which we now call "interesting specimens" and
carefully preserve in jars of alcohol.  It took next to nothing to make a
panic; a child was born a few centuries ago with six teeth in its head,
and about that time the Turks began gaining great advantages over the
Christians.  Of course there was an intimate connection between the
prodigy and the calamity.  So said the wise men of that day.

--All these out-of-the-way cases are studied connectedly now, and are
found to obey very exact rules.  With a little management one can even
manufacture living monstrosities.  Malformed salmon and other fish can be
supplied in quantity, if anybody happens to want them. Now, what all I
have said is tending to is exactly this, namely, that just as the
celestial movements are regulated by fixed laws, just as bodily
monstrosities are produced according to rule, and with as good reason as
normal shapes, so obliquities of character are to be accounted for on
perfectly natural principles; they are just as capable of classification
as the bodily ones, and they all diverge from a certain average or middle
term which is the type of its kind. If life had been a little longer I
would have written a number of essays for which, as it is, I cannot
expect to have time.  I have set down the titles of a hundred or more,
and I have often been tempted to publish these, for according to my idea,
the title of a book very often renders the rest of it unnecessary.
"Moral Teratology," for instance, which is marked No. 67 on my list of
"Essays Potential, not Actual," suggests sufficiently well what I should
be like to say in the pages it would preface.  People hold up their hands
at a moral monster as if there was no reason for his existence but his
own choice.  That was a fine specimen we read of in the papers a few
years ago, the Frenchman, it may be remembered, who used to waylay and
murder young women, and after appropriating their effects, bury their
bodies in a private cemetery he kept for that purpose.  It is very
natural, and I do not say it is not very proper, to hang such eccentric
persons as this; but it is not clear whether his vagaries produce any
more sensation at Headquarters than the meek enterprises of the mildest
of city missionaries.  For the study of Moral Teratology will teach you
that you do not get such a malformed character as that without a long
chain of causes to account for it; and if you only knew those causes, you
would know perfectly well what to expect.

You may feel pretty sure that our friend of the private cemetery was not
the child of pious and intelligent parents; that he was not nurtured by
the best of mothers, and educated by the most judicious teachers; and
that he did not come of a lineage long known and honored for its
intellectual and moral qualities.  Suppose that one should go to the
worst quarter of the city and pick out the worst-looking child of the
worst couple he could find, and then train him up successively at the
School for Infant Rogues, the Academy for Young Scamps, and the College
for Complete Criminal Education, would it be reasonable to expect a
Francois Xavier or a Henry Martyn to be the result of such a training?
The traditionists, in whose presumptuous hands the science of
anthropology has been trusted from time immemorial, have insisted on
eliminating cause and effect from the domain of morals.  When they have
come across a moral monster they have seemed to think that he put himself
together, having a free choice of all the constituents which make up
manhood, and that consequently no punishment could be too bad for him.

I say, hang him and welcome, if that is the best thing for society; hate
him, in a certain sense, as you hate a rattlesnake, but, if you pretend
to be a philosopher, recognize the fact that what you hate in him is
chiefly misfortune, and that if you had been born with his villanous low
forehead and poisoned instincts, and bred among creatures of the Races
Maudites whose natural history has to be studied like that of beasts of
prey and vermin, you would not have been sitting there in your gold-bowed
spectacles and passing judgment on the peccadilloes of your
fellow-creatures.

I have seen men and women so disinterested and noble, and devoted to the
best works, that it appeared to me if any good and faithful servant was
entitled to enter into the joys of his Lord, such as these might be.  But
I do not know that I ever met with a human being who seemed to me to have
a stronger claim on the pitying consideration and kindness of his Maker
than a wretched, puny, crippled, stunted child that I saw in Newgate, who
was pointed out as one of the most notorious and inveterate little
thieves in London.  I have no doubt that some of those who were looking
at this pitiable morbid secretion of the diseased social organism thought
they were very virtuous for hating him so heartily.

It is natural, and in one sense is all right enough.  I want to catch a
thief and put the extinguisher on an incendiary as much as my neighbors
do; but I have two sides to my consciousness as I have two sides to my
heart, one carrying dark, impure blood, and the other the bright stream
which has been purified and vivified by the great source of life and
death,--the oxygen of the air which gives all things their vital heat,
and burns all things at last to ashes.

One side of me loves and hates; the other side of me judges, say rather
pleads and suspends judgment.  I think, if I were left to myself, I
should hang a rogue and then write his apology and subscribe to a neat
monument, commemorating, not his virtues, but his misfortunes.  I should,
perhaps, adorn the marble with emblems, as is the custom with regard to
the more regular and normally constituted members of society.  It would
not be proper to put the image of a lamb upon the stone which marked the
resting-place of him of the private cemetery.  But I would not hesitate
to place the effigy of a wolf or a hyena upon the monument.  I do not
judge these animals, I only kill them or shut them up.  I presume they
stand just as well with their Maker as lambs and kids, and the existence
of such beings is a perpetual plea for God Almighty's poor, yelling,
scalping Indians, his weasand-stopping Thugs, his despised felons, his
murdering miscreants, and all the unfortunates whom we, picked
individuals of a picked class of a picked race, scrubbed, combed, and
catechized from our cradles upward, undertake to find accommodations for
in another state of being where it is to be hoped they will have a better
chance than they had in this.

The Master paused, and took off his great round spectacles.  I could not
help thinking that he looked benevolent enough to pardon Judas Iscariot
just at that moment, though his features can knot themselves up pretty,
formidably on occasion.

--You are somewhat of a phrenologist, I judge, by the way you talk of
instinctive and inherited tendencies--I said.

--They tell me I ought to be,--he answered, parrying my question, as I
thought.---I have had a famous chart made out of my cerebral organs,
according to which I ought to have been--something more than a poor
Magister Artaum.

--I thought a shade of regret deepened the lines on his broad,
antique-looking forehead, and I began talking about all the sights I had
seen in the way of monstrosities, of which I had a considerable list, as
you will see when I tell you my weakness in that direction. This, you
understand, Beloved, is private and confidential.

I pay my quarter of a dollar and go into all the side-shows that follow
the caravans and circuses round the country.  I have made friends of all
the giants and all the dwarfs.  I became acquainted with Monsieur Bihin,
le plus bel homme du monde, and one of the biggest, a great many years
ago, and have kept up my agreeable relations with him ever since.  He is
a most interesting giant, with a softness of voice and tenderness of
feeling which I find very engaging.  I was on friendly terms with Mr.
Charles Freeman, a very superior giant of American birth, seven feet
four, I think, in height, "double-jointed," of mylodon muscularity, the
same who in a British prize-ring tossed the Tipton Slasher from one side
of the rope to the other, and now lies stretched, poor fellow! in a
mighty grave in the same soil which holds the sacred ashes of Cribb, and
the honored dust of Burke,--not the one "commonly called the sublime,"
but that other Burke to whom Nature had denied the sense of hearing lest
he should be spoiled by listening to the praises of the admiring circles
which looked on his dear-bought triumphs.  Nor have I despised those
little ones whom that devout worshipper of Nature in her exceptional
forms, the distinguished Barnum, has introduced to the notice of mankind.
The General touches his chapeau to me, and the Commodore gives me a
sailor's greeting.  I have had confidential interviews with the
double-headed daughter of Africa,--so far, at least, as her twofold
personality admitted of private confidences.  I have listened to the
touching experiences of the Bearded Lady, whose rough cheeks belie her
susceptible heart.  Miss Jane Campbell has allowed me to question her on
the delicate subject of avoirdupois equivalents; and the armless fair
one, whose embrace no monarch could hope to win, has wrought me a
watch-paper with those despised digits which have been degraded from
gloves to boots in our evolution from the condition of quadrumana.

I hope you have read my experiences as good-naturedly as the old Master
listened to them.  He seemed to be pleased with my whim, and promised to
go with me to see all the side-shows of the next caravan. Before I left
him he wrote my name in a copy of the new edition of his book, telling me
that it would not all be new to me by a great deal, for he often talked
what he had printed to make up for having printed a good deal of what he
had talked.

Here is the passage of his Poem the Young Astronomer read to us.

          WIND-CLOUDS AND STAR-DRIFTS.

                    IV

     From my lone turret as I look around
     O'er the green meadows to the ring of blue,
     From slope, from summit, and from half-hid vale
     The sky is stabbed with dagger-pointed spires,
     Their gilded symbols whirling in the wind,
     Their brazen tongues proclaiming to the world,
     Here truth is sold, the only genuine ware;
     See that it has our trade-mark!
     You will buy Poison instead of food across the way,
     The lies of--this or that, each several name
     The standard's blazon and the battle-cry
     Of some true-gospel faction, and again
     The token of the Beast to all beside.
     And grouped round each I see a huddling crowd
     Alike in all things save the words they use;
     In love, in longing, hate and fear the same.

     Whom do we trust and serve?  We speak of one
     And bow to many; Athens still would find
     The shrines of all she worshipped safe within
     Our tall barbarian temples, and the thrones
     That crowned Olympus mighty as of old.
     The god of music rules the Sabbath choir;
     The lyric muse must leave the sacred nine
     To help us please the dilettante's ear;
     Plutus limps homeward with us, as we leave
     The portals of the temple where we knelt
     And listened while the god of eloquence
     (Hermes of ancient days, but now disguised
     In sable vestments) with that other god
     Somnus, the son of Erebus and Nog,
     Fights in unequal contest for our souls;
     The dreadful sovereign of the under world
     Still shakes his sceptre at us, and we hear
     The baying of the triple-throated hound;
     Eros-is young as ever, and as fair
     The lovely Goddess born of ocean's foam.

     These be thy gods, O Israel!  Who is he,
     The one ye name and tell us that ye serve,
     Whom ye would call me from my lonely tower
     To worship with the many-headed throng?
     Is it the God that walked in Eden's grove
     In the cool hour to seek our guilty sire?
     The God who dealt with Abraham as the sons
     Of that old patriarch deal with other men?
     The jealous God of Moses, one who feels
     An image as an insult, and is wroth
     With him who made it and his child unborn?
     The God who plagued his people for the sin
     Of their adulterous king, beloved of him,
     The same who offers to a chosen few
     The right to praise him in eternal song
     While a vast shrieking world of endless woe
     Blends its dread chorus with their rapturous hymn?
     Is this the God ye mean, or is it he
     Who heeds the sparrow's fall, whose loving heart
     Is as the pitying father's to his child,
     Whose lesson to his children is, "Forgive,"
     Whose plea for all, "They know not what they do"

     I claim the right of knowing whom I serve,
     Else is my service idle; He that asks
     My homage asks it from a reasoning soul.
     To crawl is not to worship; we have learned
     A drill of eyelids, bended neck and knee,
     Hanging our prayers on binges, till we ape
     The flexures of the many-jointed worm.
     Asia has taught her Aliabs and salaams
     To the world's children,--we have grown to men!
     We who have rolled the sphere beneath our feet
     To find a virgin forest, as we lay
     The beams of our rude temple, first of all
     Must frame its doorway high enough for man
     To pass unstooping; knowing as we do
     That He who shaped us last of living forms
     Has long enough been served by creeping things,
     Reptiles that left their foot-prints in the sand
     Of old sea-margins that have turned to stone,
     And men who learned their ritual; we demand
     To know him first, then trust him and then love
     When we have found him worthy of our love,
     Tried by our own poor hearts and not before;
     He must be truer than the truest friend,
     He must be tenderer than a woman's love,
     A father better than the best of sires;
     Kinder than she who bore us, though we sin
     Oftener than did the brother we are told,
     We-poor ill-tempered mortals-must forgive,
     Though seven times sinning threescore times and ten.

     This is the new world's gospel: Be ye men!
     Try well the legends of the children's time;
     Ye are the chosen people, God has led
     Your steps across the desert of the deep
     As now across the desert of the shore;
     Mountains are cleft before you as the sea
     Before the wandering tribe of Israel's sons;
     Still onward rolls the thunderous caravan,
     Its coming printed on the western sky,
     A cloud by day, by night a pillared flame;
     Your prophets are a hundred unto one
     Of them of old who cried, "Thus saith the Lord";
     They told of cities that should fall in heaps,
     But yours of mightier cities that shall rise
     Where yet the lonely fishers spread their nets,
     Where hides the fox and hoots the midnight owl;
     The tree of knowledge in your garden grows
     Not single, but at every humble door;
     Its branches lend you their immortal food,
     That fills you with the sense of what ye are,
     No servants of an altar hewed and carved
     From senseless stone by craft of human hands,
     Rabbi, or dervish, Brahmin, bishop, bonze,
     But masters of the charm with which they work
     To keep your hands from that forbidden tree!

     Ye that have tasted that divinest fruit,
     Look on this world of yours with opened eyes!
     Ye are as gods!  Nay, makers of your gods,
     Each day ye break an image in your shrine
     And plant a fairer image where it stood
     Where is the Moloch of your fathers' creed,
     Whose fires of torment burned for span-long babes?
     Fit object for a tender mother's love!
     Why not?  It was a bargain duly made
     For these same infants through the surety's act
     Intrusted with their all for earth and heaven,
     By Him who chose their guardian, knowing well
     His fitness for the task,--this, even this,
     Was the true doctrine only yesterday
     As thoughts are reckoned,--and to-day you hear
     In words that sound as if from human tongues
     Those monstrous, uncouth horrors of the past
     That blot the blue of heaven and shame the earth
     As would the saurians of the age of slime,
     Awaking from their stony sepulchres
     And wallowing hateful in the eye of day!

Four of us listened to these lines as the young man read them,--the
Master and myself and our two ladies.  This was the little party we got
up to hear him read.  I do not think much of it was very new to the
Master or myself.  At any rate, he said to me when we were alone, That is
the kind of talk the "natural man," as the theologians call him, is apt
to fall into.

--I thought it was the Apostle Paul, and not the theologians, that used
the term "natural man", I ventured to suggest.

--I should like to know where the Apostle Paul learned English?--said the
Master, with the look of one who does not mean to be tripped up if he can
help himself.---But at any rate,--he continued,--the "natural man," so
called, is worth listening to now and then, for he didn't make his
nature, and the Devil did n't make it; and if the Almighty made it, I
never saw or heard of anything he made that wasn't worth attending to.

The young man begged the Lady to pardon anything that might sound harshly
in these crude thoughts of his.  He had been taught strange things, he
said, from old theologies, when he was a child, and had thought his way
out of many of his early superstitions.  As for the Young Girl, our
Scheherezade, he said to her that she must have got dreadfully tired (at
which she colored up and said it was no such thing), and he promised
that, to pay for her goodness in listening, he would give her a lesson in
astronomy the next fair evening, if she would be his scholar, at which
she blushed deeper than before, and said something which certainly was
not No.




IX

There was no sooner a vacancy on our side of the table, than the Master
proposed a change of seats which would bring the Young Astronomer into
our immediate neighborhood.  The Scarabee was to move into the place of
our late unlamented associate, the Man of Letters, so called.  I was to
take his place, the Master to take mine, and the young man that which had
been occupied by the Master.  The advantages of this change were obvious.
The old Master likes an audience, plainly enough; and with myself on one
side of him, and the young student of science, whose speculative turn is
sufficiently shown in the passages from his poem, on the other side, he
may feel quite sure of being listened to.  There is only one trouble in
the arrangement, and that is that it brings this young man not only close
to us, but also next to our Scheherezade.

I am obliged to confess that he has shown occasional marks of inattention
even while the Master was discoursing in a way that I found agreeable
enough.  I am quite sure it is no intentional disrespect to the old
Master.  It seems to me rather that he has become interested in the
astronomical lessons he has been giving the Young Girl.  He has studied
so much alone, that it is naturally a pleasure to him to impart some of
his knowledge.  As for his young pupil, she has often thought of being a
teacher herself, so that she is of course very glad to acquire any
accomplishment that may be useful to her in that capacity.  I do not see
any reason why some of the boarders should have made such remarks as they
have done.  One cannot teach astronomy to advantage, without going out of
doors, though I confess that when two young people go out by daylight to
study the stars, as these young folks have done once or twice, I do not
so much wonder at a remark or suggestion from those who have nothing
better to do than study their neighbors.

I ought to have told the reader before this that I found, as I suspected,
that our innocent-looking Scheherezade was at the bottom of the popgun
business.  I watched her very closely, and one day, when the little
monkey made us all laugh by stopping the Member of the Haouse in the
middle of a speech he was repeating to us,--it was his great effort of
the season on a bill for the protection of horn-pout in Little Muddy
River,--I caught her making the signs that set him going.  At a slight
tap of her knife against her plate, he got all ready, and presently I saw
her cross her knife and fork upon her plate, and as she did so, pop! went
the small piece of artillery. The Member of the Haouse was just saying
that this bill hit his constitooents in their most vital--when a pellet
hit him in the feature of his countenance most exposed to aggressions and
least tolerant of liberties.  The Member resented this unparliamentary
treatment by jumping up from his chair and giving the small aggressor a
good shaking, at the same time seizing the implement which had caused his
wrath and breaking it into splinters.  The Boy blubbered, the Young Girl
changed color, and looked as if she would cry, and that was the last of
these interruptions.

I must own that I have sometimes wished we had the popgun back, for it
answered all the purpose of "the previous question" in a deliberative
assembly.  No doubt the Young Girl was capricious in setting the little
engine at work, but she cut short a good many disquisitions that
threatened to be tedious.  I find myself often wishing for her and her
small fellow-conspirator's intervention, in company where I am supposed
to be enjoying myself.  When my friend the politician gets too far into
the personal details of the quorum pars magna fui, I find myself all at
once exclaiming in mental articulation, Popgun!  When my friend the
story-teller begins that protracted narrative which has often emptied me
of all my voluntary laughter for the evening, he has got but a very
little way when I say to myself, What wouldn't I give for a pellet from
that popgun!  In short, so useful has that trivial implement proved as a
jaw-stopper and a boricide, that I never go to a club or a dinner-party,
without wishing the company included our Scheherezade and That Boy with
his popgun.

How clearly I see now into the mechanism of the Young Girl's audacious
contrivance for regulating our table-talk!  Her brain is tired half the
time, and she is too nervous to listen patiently to what a quieter person
would like well enough, or at least would not be annoyed by.  It amused
her to invent a scheme for managing the headstrong talkers, and also let
off a certain spirit of mischief which in some of these nervous girls
shows itself in much more questionable forms.  How cunning these
half-hysteric young persons are, to be sure!  I had to watch a long time
before I detected the telegraphic communication between the two
conspirators.  I have no doubt she had sedulously schooled the little
monkey to his business, and found great delight in the task of
instruction.

But now that our Scheherezade has become a scholar instead of a teacher,
she seems to be undergoing a remarkable transformation. Astronomy is
indeed a noble science.  It may well kindle the enthusiasm of a youthful
nature.  I fancy at times that I see something of that starry light which
I noticed in the young man's eyes gradually kindling in hers.  But can it
be astronomy alone that does it?  Her color comes and goes more readily
than when the old Master sat next her on the left.  It is having this
young man at her side, I suppose.  Of course it is.  I watch her with
great, I may say tender interest.  If he would only fall in love with
her, seize upon her wandering affections and fancies as the Romans seized
the Sabine virgins, lift her out of herself and her listless and weary
drudgeries, stop the outflow of this young life which is draining itself
away in forced literary labor--dear me, dear me--if, if, if--

               "If I were God
     An' ye were Martin Elginbrod!"

I am afraid all this may never be.  I fear that he is too much given to
lonely study, to self-companionship, to all sorts of questionings, to
looking at life as at a solemn show where he is only a spectator. I dare
not build up a romance on what I have yet seen.  My reader may, but I
will answer for nothing.  I shall wait and see.

The old Master and I have at last made that visit to the Scarabee which
we had so long promised ourselves.

When we knocked at his door he came and opened it, instead of saying,
Come in.  He was surprised, I have no doubt, at the sound of our
footsteps; for he rarely has a visitor, except the little monkey of a
boy, and he may have thought a troop of marauders were coming to rob him
of his treasures.  Collectors feel so rich in the possession of their
rarer specimens, that they forget how cheap their precious things seem to
common eyes, and are as afraid of being robbed as if they were dealers in
diamonds.  They have the name of stealing from each other now and then,
it is true, but many of their priceless possessions would hardly tempt a
beggar.  Values are artificial: you will not be able to get ten cents of
the year 1799 for a dime.

The Scarabee was reassured as soon as he saw our faces, and he welcomed
us not ungraciously into his small apartment.  It was hard to find a
place to sit down, for all the chairs were already occupied by cases and
boxes full of his favorites.  I began, therefore, looking round the room.
Bugs of every size and aspect met my eyes wherever they turned.  I felt
for the moment as I suppose a man may feel in a fit of delirium tremens.
Presently my attention was drawn towards a very odd-looking insect on the
mantelpiece.  This animal was incessantly raising its arms as if towards
heaven and clasping them together, as though it were wrestling in prayer.

Do look at this creature,--I said to the Master, he seems to be very hard
at work at his devotions.

Mantas religiosa,--said the Master,--I know the praying rogue. Mighty
devout and mighty cruel; crushes everything he can master, or impales it
on his spiny shanks and feeds upon it, like a gluttonous wretch as he is.
I have seen the Mantis religiosa on a larger scale than this, now and
then.  A sacred insect, sir,--sacred to many tribes of men; to the
Hottentots, to the Turks, yes, sir, and to the Frenchmen, who call the
rascal prie dieu, and believe him to have special charge of children that
have lost their way.

Doesn't it seem as if there was a vein of satire as well as of fun that
ran through the solemn manifestations of creative wisdom?  And of
deception too--do you see how nearly those dried leaves resemble an
insect?

They do, indeed,--I answered,--but not so closely as to deceive me. They
remind me of an insect, but I could not mistake them for one.

--Oh, you couldn't mistake those dried leaves for an insect, hey? Well,
how can you mistake that insect for dried leaves?  That is the question;
for insect it is,--phyllum siccifolium, the "walking leaf," as some have
called it.--The Master had a hearty laugh at my expense.

The Scarabee did not seem to be amused at the Master's remarks or at my
blunder.  Science is always perfectly serious to him; and he would no
more laugh over anything connected with his study, than a clergyman would
laugh at a funeral.

They send me all sorts of trumpery,--he said, Orthoptera and Lepidoptera;
as if a coleopterist--a scarabeeist--cared for such things.  This
business is no boy's play to me.  The insect population of the world is
not even catalogued yet, and a lifetime given to the scarabees is a small
contribution enough to their study.  I like your men of general
intelligence well enough,--your Linnwuses and your Buffons and your
Cuviers; but Cuvier had to go to Latreille for his insects, and if
Latreille had been able to consult me,--yes, me, gentlemen!--he would n't
have made the blunders he did about some of the coleoptera.

The old Master, as I think you must have found out by this time,--you,
Beloved, I mean, who read every word,--has a reasonably good opinion, as
perhaps he has a right to have, of his own intelligence and acquirements.
The Scarabee's exultation and glow as he spoke of the errors of the great
entomologist which he himself could have corrected, had the effect on the
old Master which a lusty crow has upon the feathered champion of the
neighboring barnyard.  He too knew something about insects.  Had he not
discovered a, new tabanus?  Had he not made preparations of the very
coleoptera the Scarabee studied so exclusively,--preparations which the
illustrious Swammerdam would not have been ashamed of, and dissected a
melolontha as exquisitely as Strauss Durckheim himself ever did it?  So
the Master, recalling these studies of his and certain difficult and
disputed points at which he had labored in one of his entomological
paroxysms, put a question which there can be little doubt was intended to
puzzle the Scarabee, and perhaps,--for the best of us is human (I am
beginning to love the old Master, but he has his little weaknesses, thank
Heaven, like the rest of us),--I say perhaps, was meant to show that some
folks knew as much about some things as some other folks.

The little dried-up specialist did not dilate into fighting dimensions
as--perhaps, again--the Master may have thought he would. He looked a
mild surprise, but remained as quiet as one of his own beetles when you
touch him and he makes believe he is dead.  The blank silence became
oppressive.  Was the Scarabee crushed, as so many of his namesakes are
crushed, under the heel of this trampling omniscient?

At last the Scarabee creaked out very slowly, "Did I understand you to
ask the following question, to wit?" and so forth; for I was quite out of
my depth, and only know that he repeated the Master's somewhat complex
inquiry, word for word.

--That was exactly my question,--said the Master,--and I hope it is not
uncivil to ask one which seems to me to be a puzzler.

Not uncivil in the least,--said the Scarabee, with something as much like
a look of triumph as his dry face permitted,--not uncivil at all, but a
rather extraordinary question to ask at this date of entomological
history.  I settled that question some years ago, by a series of
dissections, six-and-thirty in number, reported in an essay I can show
you and would give you a copy of, but that I am a little restricted in my
revenue, and our Society has to be economical, so I have but this one.
You see, sir,--and he went on with elytra and antennae and tarsi and
metatarsi and tracheae and stomata and wing-muscles and leg-muscles and
ganglions,--all plain enough, I do not doubt, to those accustomed to
handling dor-bugs and squash-bugs and such undesirable objects of
affection to all but naturalists.

He paused when he got through, not for an answer, for there evidently was
none, but to see how the Master would take it.  The Scarabee had had it
all his own way.

The Master was loyal to his own generous nature.  He felt as a peaceful
citizen might feel who had squared off at a stranger for some supposed
wrong, and suddenly discovered that he was undertaking to chastise Mr.
Dick Curtis, "the pet of the Fancy," or Mr. Joshua Hudson; "the John Bull
fighter."

He felt the absurdity of his discomfiture, for he turned to me
good-naturedly, and said,

    "Poor Johnny Raw!  What madness could impel
     So rum a flat to face so prime a swell?"

To tell the truth, I rather think the Master enjoyed his own defeat. The
Scarabee had a right to his victory; a man does not give his life to the
study of a single limited subject for nothing, and the moment we come
across a first-class expert we begin to take a pride in his superiority.
It cannot offend us, who have no right at all to be his match on his own
ground.  Besides, there is a very curious sense of satisfaction in
getting a fair chance to sneer at ourselves and scoff at our own
pretensions.  The first person of our dual consciousness has been
smirking and rubbing his hands and felicitating himself on his
innumerable superiorities, until we have grown a little tired of him.
Then, when the other fellow, the critic, the cynic, the Shimei, who has
been quiet, letting self-love and self-glorification have their perfect
work, opens fire upon the first half of our personality and overwhelms it
with that wonderful vocabulary of abuse of which he is the unrivalled
master, there is no denying that he enjoys it immensely; and as he is
ourself for the moment, or at least the chief portion of ourself (the
other half-self retiring into a dim corner of semiconsciousness and
cowering under the storm of sneers and contumely,--you follow me
perfectly, Beloved,--the way is as plain as the path of the babe to the
maternal fount), as, I say, the abusive fellow is the chief part of us
for the time, and he likes to exercise his slanderous vocabulary, we on
the whole enjoy a brief season of self-depreciation and self-scolding
very heartily.

It is quite certain that both of us, the Master and myself, conceived on
the instant a respect for the Scarabee which we had not before felt.  He
had grappled with one difficulty at any rate and mastered it.  He had
settled one thing, at least, so it appeared, in such a way that it was
not to be brought up again.  And now he was determined, if it cost him
the effort of all his remaining days, to close another discussion and put
forever to rest the anxious doubts about the larva of meloe.

--Your thirty-six dissections must have cost you a deal of time and
labor,--the Master said.

--What have I to do with time, but to fill it up with labor?--answered
the Scarabee.---It is my meat and drink to work over my beetles.  My
holidays are when I get a rare specimen.  My rest is to watch the habits
of insects, those that I do not pretend to study. Here is my muscarium,
my home for house-flies; very interesting creatures; here they breed and
buzz and feed and enjoy themselves, and die in a good old age of a few
months.  My favorite insect lives in this other case; she is at home, but
in her private-chamber; you shall see her.

He tapped on the glass lightly, and a large, gray, hairy spider came
forth from the hollow of a funnel-like web.

--And this is all the friend you have to love? said the Master, with a
tenderness in his voice which made the question very significant.

--Nothing else loves me better than she does, that I know of,--he
answered.

--To think of it!  Not even a dog to lick his hand, or a cat to purr and
rub her fur against him!  Oh, these boarding-houses, these
boarding-houses!  What forlorn people one sees stranded on their desolate
shores!  Decayed gentlewomen with the poor wrecks of what once made their
households beautiful, disposed around them in narrow chambers as they
best may be, coming down day after day, poor souls! to sit at the board
with strangers; their hearts full of sad memories which have no language
but a sigh, no record but the lines of sorrow on their features; orphans,
creatures with growing tendrils and nothing to cling to; lonely rich men,
casting about them what to do with the wealth they never knew how to
enjoy, when they shall no longer worry over keeping and increasing it;
young men and young women, left to their instincts, unguarded, unwatched,
save by malicious eyes, which are sure to be found and to find occupation
in these miscellaneous collections of human beings; and now and then a
shred of humanity like this little adust specialist, with just the
resources needed to keep the "radical moisture" from entirely exhaling
from his attenuated organism, and busying himself over a point of
science, or compiling a hymn-book, or editing a grammar or a
dictionary;--such are the tenants of boarding-houses whom we cannot think
of without feeling how sad it is when the wind is not tempered to the
shorn lamb; when the solitary, whose hearts are shrivelling, are not set
in families!

The Master was greatly interested in the Scarabee's Muscarium.

--I don't remember,--he said,--that I have heard of such a thing as that
before.  Mighty curious creatures, these same house-flies!  Talk about
miracles!  Was there ever anything more miraculous, so far as our common
observation goes, than the coming and the going of these creatures?  Why
didn't Job ask where the flies come from and where they go to?  I did not
say that you and I don't know, but how many people do know anything about
it?  Where are the cradles of the young flies?  Where are the cemeteries
of the dead ones, or do they die at all except when we kill them?  You
think all the flies of the year are dead and gone, and there comes a warm
day and all at once there is a general resurrection of 'em; they had been
taking a nap, that is all.

--I suppose you do not trust your spider in the Muscarium?--said I,
addressing the Scarabee.

--Not exactly,--he answered,--she is a terrible creature.  She loves me,
I think, but she is a killer and a cannibal among other insects. I wanted
to pair her with a male spider, but it wouldn't do.

-Wouldn't do?--said I,--why not?  Don't spiders have their mates as well
as other folks?

-Oh yes, sometimes; but the females are apt to be particular, and if they
don't like the mate you offer them they fall upon him and kill him and
eat him up.  You see they are a great deal bigger and stronger than the
males, and they are always hungry and not always particularly anxious to
have one of the other sex bothering round.

--Woman's rights!--said I,--there you have it!  Why don't those talking
ladies take a spider as their emblem?  Let them form arachnoid
associations, spinsters and spiders would be a good motto.

--The Master smiled.  I think it was an eleemosynary smile, for my
pleasantry seems to me a particularly basso rilievo, as I look upon it in
cold blood.  But conversation at the best is only a thin sprinkling of
occasional felicities set in platitudes and commonplaces.  I never heard
people talk like the characters in the "School for Scandal,"--I should
very much like to.---I say the Master smiled.  But the Scarabee did not
relax a muscle of his countenance.

--There are persons whom the very mildest of faecetiae sets off into such
convulsions of laughter, that one is afraid lest they should injure
themselves.  Even when a jest misses fire completely, so that it is no
jest at all, but only a jocular intention, they laugh just as heartily.
Leave out the point of your story, get the word wrong on the duplicity of
which the pun that was to excite hilarity depended, and they still honor
your abortive attempt with the most lusty and vociferous merriment.

There is a very opposite class of persons whom anything in the nature of
a joke perplexes, troubles, and even sometimes irritates, seeming to make
them think they are trifled with, if not insulted.  If you are fortunate
enough to set the whole table laughing, one of this class of persons will
look inquiringly round, as if something had happened, and, seeing
everybody apparently amused but himself, feel as if he was being laughed
at, or at any rate as if something had been said which he was not to
hear.  Often, however, it does not go so far as this, and there is
nothing more than mere insensibility to the cause of other people's
laughter, a sort of joke-blindness, comparable to the well-known
color-blindness with which many persons are afflicted as a congenital
incapacity.

I have never seen the Scarabee smile.  I have seen him take off his
goggles,--he breakfasts in these occasionally,--I suppose when he has
been tiring his poor old eyes out over night gazing through his
microscope,--I have seen him take his goggles off, I say, and stare about
him, when the rest of us were laughing at something which amused us, but
his features betrayed nothing more than a certain bewilderment, as if we
had been foreigners talking in an unknown tongue.  I do not think it was
a mere fancy of mine that he bears a kind of resemblance to the tribe of
insects he gives his life to studying.  His shiny black coat; his rounded
back, convex with years of stooping over his minute work; his angular
movements, made natural to him by his habitual style of manipulation; the
aridity of his organism, with which his voice is in perfect keeping;--all
these marks of his special sedentary occupation are so nearly what might
be expected, and indeed so much, in accordance with the more general fact
that a man's aspect is subdued to the look of what he works in, that I do
not feel disposed to accuse myself of exaggeration in my account of the
Scarabee's appearance.  But I think he has learned something else of his
coleopterous friends.  The beetles never smile. Their physiognomy is not
adapted to the display of the emotions; the lateral movement of their
jaws being effective for alimentary purposes, but very limited in its
gamut of expression.  It is with these unemotional beings that the
Scarabee passes his life.  He has but one object, and that is perfectly
serious, to his mind, in fact, of absorbing interest and importance.  In
one aspect of the matter he is quite right, for if the Creator has taken
the trouble to make one of His creatures in just such a way and not
otherwise, from the beginning of its existence on our planet in ages of
unknown remoteness to the present time, the man who first explains His
idea to us is charged with a revelation.  It is by no means impossible
that there may be angels in the celestial hierarchy to whom it would be
new and interesting.  I have often thought that spirits of a higher order
than man might be willing to learn something from a human mind like that
of Newton, and I see no reason why an angelic being might not be glad to
hear a lecture from Mr.  Huxley, or Mr. Tyndall, or one of our friends at
Cambridge.

I have been sinuous as the Links of Forth seen from Stirling Castle, or
as that other river which threads the Berkshire valley and runs, a
perennial stream, through my memory,--from which I please myself with
thinking that I have learned to wind without fretting against the shore,
or forgetting cohere I am flowing,--sinuous, I say, but not jerky,--no,
not jerky nor hard to follow for a reader of the right sort, in the prime
of life and full possession of his or her faculties.

--All this last page or so, you readily understand, has been my private
talk with you, the Reader.  The cue of the conversation which I
interrupted by this digression is to be found in the words "a good
motto;" from which I begin my account of the visit again.

--Do you receive many visitors,--I mean vertebrates, not articulates?
--said the Master.

I thought this question might perhaps bring il disiato riso, the
long-wished-for smile, but the Scarabee interpreted it in the simplest
zoological sense, and neglected its hint of playfulness with the most
absolute unconsciousness, apparently, of anything not entirely serious
and literal.

--You mean friends, I suppose,--he answered.--I have correspondents, but
I have no friends except this spider.  I live alone, except when I go to
my subsection meetings; I get a box of insects now and then, and send a
few beetles to coleopterists in other entomological districts; but
science is exacting, and a man that wants to leave his record has not
much time for friendship.  There is no great chance either for making
friends among naturalists.  People that are at work on different things
do not care a great deal for each other's specialties, and people that
work on the same thing are always afraid lest one should get ahead of the
other, or steal some of his ideas before he has made them public.  There
are none too many people you can trust in your laboratory.  I thought I
had a friend once, but he watched me at work and stole the discovery of a
new species from me, and, what is more, had it named after himself.
Since that time I have liked spiders better than men.  They are hungry
and savage, but at any rate they spin their own webs out of their own
insides.  I like very well to talk with gentlemen that play with my
branch of entomology; I do not doubt it amused you, and if you want to
see anything I can show you, I shall have no scruple in letting you see
it.  I have never had any complaint to make of amatoors.

--Upon my honor,--I would hold my right hand up and take my Bible-oath,
if it was not busy with the pen at this moment,--I do not believe the
Scarabee had the least idea in the world of the satire on the student of
the Order of Things implied in his invitation to the "amatoor."  As for
the Master, he stood fire perfectly, as he always does; but the idea that
he, who had worked a considerable part of several seasons at examining
and preparing insects, who believed himself to have given a new tabanus
to the catalogue of native diptera, the idea that he was playing with
science, and might be trusted anywhere as a harmless amateur, from whom
no expert could possibly fear any anticipation of his unpublished
discoveries, went beyond anything set down in that book of his which
contained so much of the strainings of his wisdom.

The poor little Scarabee began fidgeting round about this time, and
uttering some half-audible words, apologetical, partly, and involving an
allusion to refreshments.  As he spoke, he opened a small cupboard, and
as he did so out bolted an uninvited tenant of the same, long in person,
sable in hue, and swift of movement, on seeing which the Scarabee simply
said, without emotion, blatta, but I, forgetting what was due to good
manners, exclaimed cockroach!

We could not make up our minds to tax the Scarabee's hospitality, already
levied upon by the voracious articulate.  So we both alleged a state of
utter repletion, and did not solve the mystery of the contents of the
cupboard,--not too luxurious, it may be conjectured, and yet kindly
offered, so that we felt there was a moist filament of the social
instinct running like a nerve through that exsiccated and almost
anhydrous organism.

We left him with professions of esteem and respect which were real. We
had gone, not to scoff, but very probably to smile, and I will not say we
did not.  But the Master was more thoughtful than usual.

--If I had not solemnly dedicated myself to the study of the Order of
Things,--he said,--I do verily believe I would give what remains to me of
life to the investigation of some single point I could utterly eviscerate
and leave finally settled for the instruction and, it may be, the
admiration of all coming time.  The keel ploughs ten thousand leagues of
ocean and leaves no trace of its deep-graven furrows.  The chisel scars
only a few inches on the face of a rock, but the story it has traced is
read by a hundred generations.  The eagle leaves no track of his path, no
memory of the place where he built his nest; but a patient mollusk has
bored a little hole in a marble column of the temple of Serapis, and the
monument of his labor outlasts the altar and the statue of the divinity.

--Whew!--said I to myself,--that sounds a little like what we college
boys used to call a "squirt."--The Master guessed my thought and said,
smiling,

--That is from one of my old lectures.  A man's tongue wags along quietly
enough, but his pen begins prancing as soon as it touches paper.  I know
what you are thinking--you're thinking this is a squirt.  That word has
taken the nonsense out of a good many high-stepping fellows.  But it did
a good deal of harm too, and it was a vulgar lot that applied it
oftenest.

I am at last perfectly satisfied that our Landlady has no designs on the
Capitalist, and as well convinced that any fancy of mine that he was like
to make love to her was a mistake.  The good woman is too much absorbed
in her children, and more especially in "the Doctor," as she delights to
call her son, to be the prey of any foolish desire of changing her
condition.  She is doing very well as it is, and if the young man
succeeds, as I have little question that he will, I think it probable
enough that she will retire from her position as the head of a
boarding-house.  We have all liked the good woman who have lived with
her,--I mean we three friends who have put ourselves on record.  Her
talk, I must confess, is a little diffuse and not always absolutely
correct, according to the standard of the great Worcester; she is subject
to lachrymose cataclysms and semiconvulsive upheavals when she reverts in
memory to her past trials, and especially when she recalls the virtues of
her deceased spouse, who was, I suspect, an adjunct such as one finds not
rarely annexed to a capable matron in charge of an establishment like
hers; that is to say, an easy-going, harmless, fetch-and-carry,
carve-and-help, get-out-of-the-way kind of neuter, who comes up three
times (as they say drowning people do) every day, namely, at breakfast,
dinner, and tea, and disappears, submerged beneath the waves of life,
during the intervals of these events.

It is a source of genuine delight to me, who am of a kindly nature
enough, according to my own reckoning, to watch the good woman, and see
what looks of pride and affection she bestows upon her Benjamin, and how,
in spite of herself, the maternal feeling betrays its influence in her
dispensations of those delicacies which are the exceptional element in
our entertainments.  I will not say that Benjamin's mess, like his
Scripture namesake's, is five times as large as that of any of the
others, for this would imply either an economical distribution to the
guests in general or heaping the poor young man's plate in a way that
would spoil the appetite of an Esquimau, but you may be sure he fares
well if anybody does; and I would have you understand that our Landlady
knows what is what as well as who is who.

I begin really to entertain very sanguine expectations of young Doctor
Benjamin Franklin.  He has lately been treating a patient of whose
good-will may prove of great importance to him.  The Capitalist hurt one
of his fingers somehow or other, and requested our young doctor to take a
look at it.  The young doctor asked nothing better than to take charge of
the case, which proved more serious than might have been at first
expected, and kept him in attendance more than a week.  There was one
very odd thing about it.  The Capitalist seemed to have an idea that he
was like to be ruined in the matter of bandages,--small strips of worn
linen which any old woman could have spared him from her rag-bag, but
which, with that strange perversity which long habits of economy give to
a good many elderly people, he seemed to think were as precious as if
they had been turned into paper and stamped with promises to pay in
thousands, from the national treasury.  It was impossible to get this
whim out of him, and the young doctor had tact enough to humor him in it.
All this did not look very promising for the state of mind in which the
patient was like to receive his bill for attendance when that should be
presented.  Doctor Benjamin was man enough, however, to come up to the
mark, and sent him in such an account as it was becoming to send a man of
ample means who had been diligently and skilfully cared for. He looked
forward with some uncertainty as to how it would be received.  Perhaps
his patient would try to beat him down, and Doctor Benjamin made up his
mind to have the whole or nothing.  Perhaps he would pay the whole
amount, but with a look, and possibly a word, that would make every
dollar of it burn like a blister.

Doctor Benjamin's conjectures were not unnatural, but quite remote from
the actual fact.  As soon as his patient had got entirely well, the young
physician sent in his bill.  The Capitalist requested him to step into
his room with him, and paid the full charge in the handsomest and most
gratifying way, thanking him for his skill and attention, and assuring
him that he had had great satisfaction in submitting himself to such
competent hands, and should certainly apply to him again in case he
should have any occasion for a medical adviser.  We must not be too
sagacious in judging people by the little excrescences of their
character.  Ex pede Herculem may often prove safe enough, but ex verruca
Tullium is liable to mislead a hasty judge of his fellow-men.

I have studied the people called misers and thought a good deal about
them.  In former years I used to keep a little gold by me in order to
ascertain for myself exactly the amount of pleasure to be got out of
handling it; this being the traditional delight of the old-fashioned
miser.  It is by no means to be despised.  Three or four hundred dollars
in double-eagles will do very well to experiment on.  There is something
very agreeable in the yellow gleam, very musical in the metallic clink,
very satisfying in the singular weight, and very stimulating in the
feeling that all the world over these same yellow disks are the
master-keys that let one in wherever he wants to go, the servants that
bring him pretty nearly everything he wants, except virtue,--and a good
deal of what passes for that.  I confess, then, to an honest liking for
the splendors and the specific gravity and the manifold potentiality of
the royal metal, and I understand, after a certain imperfect fashion, the
delight that an old ragged wretch, starving himself in a crazy hovel,
takes in stuffing guineas into old stockings and filling earthen pots
with sovereigns, and every now and then visiting his hoards and fingering
the fat pieces, and thinking ever all that they represent of earthly and
angelic and diabolic energy.  A miser pouring out his guineas into his
palm and bathing his shrivelled and trembling hands in the yellow heaps
before him, is not the prosaic being we are in the habit of thinking him.
He is a dreamer, almost a poet.  You and I read a novel or a poem to help
our imaginations to build up palaces, and transport us into the emotional
states and the felicitous conditions of the ideal characters pictured in
the book we are reading.  But think of him and the significance of the
symbols he is handling as compared with the empty syllables and words we
are using to build our aerial edifices with!  In this hand he holds the
smile of beauty and in that the dagger of revenge.  The contents of that
old glove will buy him the willing service of many an adroit sinner, and
with what that coarse sack contains he can purchase the prayers of holy
men for all succeeding time.  In this chest is a castle in Spain, a real
one, and not only in Spain, but anywhere he will choose to have it.  If
he would know what is the liberality of judgment of any of the straiter
sects, he has only to hand over that box of rouleaux to the trustees of
one of its educational institutions for the endowment of two or three
professorships.  If he would dream of being remembered by coming
generations, what monument so enduring as a college building that shall
bear his name, and even when its solid masonry shall crumble give place
to another still charged with the same sacred duty of perpetuating his
remembrance.  Who was Sir Matthew Holworthy, that his name is a household
word on the lips of thousands of scholars, and will be centuries hence,
as that of Walter de Merton, dead six hundred years ago, is to-day at
Oxford?  Who was Mistress Holden, that she should be blessed among women
by having her name spoken gratefully and the little edifice she caused to
be erected preserved as her monument from generation to generation?  All
these possibilities, the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh, the
pride of life; the tears of grateful orphans by the gallon; the prayers
of Westminster Assembly's Catechism divines by the thousand; the masses
of priests by the century;--all these things, and more if more there be
that the imagination of a lover of gold is likely to range over, the
miser hears and sees and feels and hugs and enjoys as he paddles with his
lean hands among the sliding, shining, ringing, innocent-looking bits of
yellow metal, toying with them as the lion-tamer handles the great
carnivorous monster, whose might and whose terrors are child's play to
the latent forces and power of harm-doing of the glittering counters
played with in the great game between angels and devils.

I have seen a good deal of misers, and I think I understand them as well
as most persons do.  But the Capitalist's economy in rags and his
liberality to the young doctor are very oddly contrasted with each other.
I should not be surprised at any time to hear that he had endowed a
scholarship or professorship or built a college dormitory, in spite of
his curious parsimony in old linen.

I do not know where our Young Astronomer got the notions that he
expresses so freely in the lines that follow.  I think the statement is
true, however, which I see in one of the most popular Cyclopaedias, that
"the non-clerical mind in all ages is disposed to look favorably upon the
doctrine of the universal restoration to holiness and happiness of all
fallen intelligences, whether human or angelic."  Certainly, most of the
poets who have reached the heart of men, since Burns dropped the tear for
poor "auld Nickie-ben" that softened the stony-hearted theology of
Scotland, have had "non-clerical" minds, and I suppose our young friend
is in his humble way an optimist like them.  What he says in verse is
very much the same thing as what is said in prose in all companies, and
thought by a great many who are thankful to anybody that will say it for
them,--not a few clerical as wall as "non-clerical" persons among them.

               WIND-CLOUDS AND STAR-DRIFTS.

                         V

     What am I but the creature Thou hast made?
     What have I save the blessings Thou hast lent?
     What hope I but Thy mercy and Thy love?
     Who but myself shall cloud my soul with fear?
     Whose hand protect me from myself but Thine?

     I claim the rights of weakness, I, the babe,
     Call on my sire to shield me from the ills
     That still beset my path, not trying me
     With snares beyond my wisdom or my strength,
     He knowing I shall use them to my harm,
     And find a tenfold misery in the sense
     That in my childlike folly I have sprung
     The trap upon myself as vermin use
     Drawn by the cunning bait to certain doom.
     Who wrought the wondrous charm that leads us on
     To sweet perdition, but the self-same power
     That set the fearful engine to destroy
     His wretched offspring (as the Rabbis tell),
     And hid its yawning jaws and treacherous springs
     In such a show of innocent sweet flowers
     It lured the sinless angels and they fell?

     Ah!  He who prayed the prayer of all mankind
     Summed in those few brief words the mightiest plea
     For erring souls before the courts of heaven,
     Save us from being tempted,--lest we fall!
     If we are only as the potter's clay
     Made to be fashioned as the artist wills,
     And broken into shards if we offend
     The eye of Him who made us, it is well;
     Such love as the insensate lump of clay
     That spins upon the swift-revolving wheel
     Bears to the hand that shapes its growing form,
    --Such love, no more, will be our hearts' return
     To the great Master-workman for his care,
     Or would be, save that this, our breathing clay,
     Is intertwined with fine innumerous threads
     That make it conscious in its framer's hand;
     And this He must remember who has filled
     These vessels with the deadly draught of life,
     Life, that means death to all it claims.  Our love
     Must kindle in the ray that streams from heaven,
     A faint reflection of the light divine;
     The sun must warm the earth before the rose
     Can show her inmost heart-leaves to the sun.

     He yields some fraction of the Maker's right
     Who gives the quivering nerve its sense of pain;
     Is there not something in the pleading eye
     Of the poor brute that suffers, which arraigns
     The law that bids it suffer?  Has it not
     A claim for some remembrance in the book
     That fills its pages with the idle words
     Spoken of men?  Or is it only clay,
     Bleeding and aching in the potter's hand,
     Yet all his own to treat it as he will
     And when he will to cast it at his feet,
     Shattered, dishonored, lost forevermore?
     My dog loves me, but could he look beyond
     His earthly master, would his love extend
     To Him who--Hush!  I will not doubt that He
     Is better than our fears, and will not wrong
     The least, the meanest of created things!

     He would not trust me with the smallest orb
     That circles through the sky; he would not give
     A meteor to my guidance; would not leave
     The coloring of a cloudlet to my hand;
     He locks my beating heart beneath its bars
     And keeps the key himself; he measures out
     The draughts of vital breath that warm my blood,
     Winds up the springs of instinct which uncoil,
     Each in its season; ties me to my home,
     My race, my time, my nation, and my creed
     So closely that if I but slip my wrist
     Out of the band that cuts it to the bone,
     Men say, "He hath a devil"; he has lent
     All that I hold in trust, as unto one
     By reason of his weakness and his years
     Not fit to hold the smallest shred in fee
     Of those most common things he calls his own
     And yet--my Rabbi tells me--he has left
     The care of that to which a million worlds.
     Filled with unconscious life were less than naught,
     Has left that mighty universe, the Soul,
     To the weak guidance of our baby hands,
     Turned us adrift with our immortal charge,
     Let the foul fiends have access at their will,
     Taking the shape of angels, to our hearts,
     Our hearts already poisoned through and through
     With the fierce virus of ancestral sin.
     If what my Rabbi tells me is the truth,
     Why did the choir of angels sing for joy?
     Heaven must be compassed in a narrow space,
     And offer more than room enough for all
     That pass its portals; but the underworld,
     The godless realm, the place where demons forge
     Their fiery darts and adamantine chains,
     Must swarm with ghosts that for a little while
     Had worn the garb of flesh, and being heirs
     Of all the dulness of their stolid sires,
     And all the erring instincts of their tribe,
     Nature's own teaching, rudiments of "sin,"
     Fell headlong in the snare that could not fail
     To trap the wretched creatures shaped of clay
     And cursed with sense enough to lose their souls!

     Brother, thy heart is troubled at my word;
     Sister, I see the cloud is on thy brow.
     He will not blame me, He who sends not peace,
     But sends a sword, and bids us strike amain
     At Error's gilded crest, where in the van
     Of earth's great army, mingling with the best
     And bravest of its leaders, shouting loud
     The battle-cries that yesterday have led
     The host of Truth to victory, but to-day
     Are watchwords of the laggard and the slave,
     He leads his dazzled cohorts.  God has made
     This world a strife of atoms and of spheres;
     With every breath I sigh myself away
     And take my tribute from the wandering wind
     To fan the flame of life's consuming fire;
     So, while my thought has life, it needs must burn,
     And burning, set the stubble-fields ablaze,
     Where all the harvest long ago was reaped
     And safely garnered in the ancient barns,
     But still the gleaners, groping for their food,
     Go blindly feeling through the close-shorn straw,
     While the young reapers flash their glittering steel
     Where later suns have ripened nobler grain!

We listened to these lines in silence.  They were evidently written
honestly, and with feeling, and no doubt meant to be reverential.  I
thought, however, the Lady looked rather serious as he finished reading.
The Young Girl's cheeks were flushed, but she was not in the mood for
criticism.

As we came away the Master said to me--The stubble-fields are mighty slow
to take fire.  These young fellows catch up with the world's ideas one
after another,--they have been tamed a long while, but they find them
running loose in their minds, and think they are ferae naturae.  They
remind me of young sportsmen who fire at the first feathers they see, and
bring down a barnyard fowl.  But the chicken may be worth bagging for all
that, he said, good-humoredly.




X

Caveat Lector.  Let the reader look out for himself.  The old Master,
whose words I have so frequently quoted and shall quote more of, is a
dogmatist who lays down the law, ex cathedra, from the chair of his own
personality.  I do not deny that he has the ambition of knowing something
about a greater number of subjects than any one man ought to meddle with,
except in a very humble and modest way.  And that is not his way.  There
was no doubt something of, humorous bravado in his saying that the actual
"order of things" did not offer a field sufficiently ample for his
intelligence.  But if I found fault with him, which would be easy enough,
I should say that he holds and expresses definite opinions about matters
that he could afford to leave open questions, or ask the judgment of
others about.  But I do not want to find fault with him.  If he does not
settle all the points he speaks of so authoritatively, he sets me
thinking about them, and I like a man as a companion who is not afraid of
a half-truth.  I know he says some things peremptorily that he may
inwardly debate with himself.  There are two ways of dealing with
assertions of this kind.  One may attack them on the false side and
perhaps gain a conversational victory.  But I like better to take them up
on the true side and see how much can be made of that aspect of the
dogmatic assertion.  It is the only comfortable way of dealing with
persons like the old Master.

There have been three famous talkers in Great Britain, either of whom
would illustrate what I say about dogmatists well enough for my purpose.
You cannot doubt to what three I refer: Samuel the First, Samuel the
Second, and Thomas, last of the Dynasty.  (I mean the living Thomas and
not Thomas B.)

I say the last of the Dynasty, for the conversational dogmatist on the
imperial scale becomes every year more and more an impossibility. If he
is in intelligent company he will be almost sure to find some one who
knows more about some of the subjects he generalizes upon than any
wholesale thinker who handles knowledge by the cargo is like to know.  I
find myself, at certain intervals, in the society of a number of experts
in science, literature, and art, who cover a pretty wide range, taking
them all together, of human knowledge.  I have not the least doubt that
if the great Dr. Samuel Johnson should come in and sit with this company
at one of their Saturday dinners, he would be listened to, as he always
was, with respect and attention.  But there are subjects upon which the
great talker could speak magisterially in his time and at his club, upon
which so wise a man would express himself guardedly at the meeting where
I have supposed him a guest.  We have a scientific man or two among us,
for instance, who would be entitled to smile at the good Doctor's
estimate of their labors, as I give it here:

"Of those that spin out life in trifles and die without a memorial, many
flatter themselves with high opinion of their own importance and imagine
that they are every day adding some improvement to human life."--"Some
turn the wheel of electricity, some suspend rings to a loadstone, and
find that what they did yesterday they can do again to-day.  Some
register the changes of the wind, and die fully convinced that the wind
is changeable.

"There are men yet more profound, who have heard that two colorless
liquors may produce a color by union, and that two cold bodies will grow
hot if they are mingled; they mingle them, and produce the effect
expected, say it is strange, and mingle them again."

I cannot transcribe this extract without an intense inward delight in its
wit and a full recognition of its thorough half-truthfulness. Yet if
while the great moralist is indulging in these vivacities, he can be
imagined as receiving a message from Mr. Boswell or Mrs. Thrale flashed
through the depths of the ocean, we can suppose he might be tempted to
indulge in another oracular utterance, something like this:----A wise
man recognizes the convenience of a general statement, but he bows to the
authority of a particular fact.  He who would bound the possibilities of
human knowledge by the limitations of present acquirements would take the
dimensions of the infant in ordering the habiliments of the adult.  It is
the province of knowledge to speak and it is the privilege of wisdom to
listen.  Will the Professor have the kindness to inform me by what steps
of gradual development the ring and the loadstone, which were but
yesterday the toys of children and idlers, have become the means of
approximating the intelligences of remote continents, and wafting
emotions unchilled through the abysses of the no longer unfathomable
deep?

--This, you understand, Beloved, is only a conventional imitation of the
Doctor's style of talking.  He wrote in grand balanced phrases, but his
conversation was good, lusty, off-hand familiar talk.  He used very often
to have it all his own way.  If he came back to us we must remember that
to treat him fairly we must suppose him on a level with the knowledge of
our own time.  But that knowledge is more specialized, a great deal, than
knowledge was in his day.  Men cannot talk about things they have seen
from the outside with the same magisterial authority the talking dynasty
pretended to.  The sturdy old moralist felt grand enough, no doubt, when
he said, "He that is growing great and happy by electrifying a bottle
wonders how the world can be engaged by trifling prattle about war or
peace." Benjamin Franklin was one of these idlers who were electrifying
bottles, but he also found time to engage in the trifling prattle about
war and peace going on in those times.  The talking Doctor hits him very
hard in "Taxation no Tyranny":  "Those who wrote the Address (of the
American Congress in 1775), though they have shown no great extent or
profundity of mind, are yet probably wiser than to believe it: but they
have been taught by some master of mischief how to put in motion the
engine of political electricity; to attract by the sounds of Liberty and
Property, to repel by those of Popery and Slavery; and to give the great
stroke by the name of Boston." The talking dynasty has always been hard
upon us Americans.  King Samuel II. says: "It is, I believe, a fact
verified beyond doubt, that some years ago it was impossible to obtain a
copy of the Newgate Calendar, as they had all been bought up by the
Americans, whether to suppress the blazon of their forefathers or to
assist in their genealogical researches I could never learn
satisfactorily." As for King Thomas, the last of the monological
succession, he made such a piece of work with his prophecies and his
sarcasms about our little trouble with some of the Southern States, that
we came rather to pity him for his whims and crotchets than to get angry
with him for calling us bores and other unamiable names.

I do not think we believe things because considerable people say them, on
personal authority, that is, as intelligent listeners very commonly did a
century ago.  The newspapers have lied that belief out of us.  Any man
who has a pretty gift of talk may hold his company a little while when
there is nothing better stirring.  Every now and then a man who may be
dull enough prevailingly has a passion of talk come over him which makes
him eloquent and silences the rest.  I have a great respect for these
divine paroxysms, these half-inspired moments of influx when they seize
one whom we had not counted among the luminaries of the social sphere.
But the man who can--give us a fresh experience on anything that
interests us overrides everybody else.  A great peril escaped makes a
great story-teller of a common person enough.  I remember when a certain
vessel was wrecked long ago, that one of the survivors told the story as
well as Defoe could have told it.  Never a word from him before; never a
word from him since.  But when it comes to talking one's common
thoughts,--those that come and go as the breath does; those that tread
the mental areas and corridors with steady, even foot-fall, an
interminable procession of every hue and garb,--there are few, indeed,
that can dare to lift the curtain which hangs before the window in the
breast and throw open the window, and let us look and listen.  We are all
loyal enough to our sovereign when he shows himself, but sovereigns are
scarce.  I never saw the absolute homage of listeners but once, that I
remember, to a man's common talk, and that was to the conversation of an
old man, illustrious by his lineage and the exalted honors he had won,
whose experience had lessons for the wisest, and whose eloquence had made
the boldest tremble.

All this because I told you to look out for yourselves and not take for
absolute truth everything the old Master of our table, or anybody else at
it sees fit to utter.  At the same time I do not think that he, or any of
us whose conversation I think worth reporting, says anything for the mere
sake of saying it and without thinking that it holds some truth, even if
it is not unqualifiedly true.

I suppose a certain number of my readers wish very heartily that the
Young Astronomer whose poetical speculations I am recording would stop
trying by searching to find out the Almighty, and sign the thirty-nine
articles, or the Westminster Confession of Faith, at any rate slip his
neck into some collar or other, and pull quietly in the harness, whether
it galled him or not.  I say, rather, let him have his talk out; if
nobody else asks the questions he asks, some will be glad to hear them,
but if you, the reader, find the same questions in your own mind, you
need not be afraid to see how they shape themselves in another's
intelligence.  Do you recognize the fact that we are living in a new
time?  Knowledge--it excites prejudices to call it science--is advancing
as irresistibly, as majestically, as remorselessly as the ocean moves in
upon the shore.  The courtiers of King Canute (I am not afraid of the old
comparison), represented by the adherents of the traditional beliefs of
the period, move his chair back an inch at a time, but not until his feet
are pretty damp, not to say wet.  The rock on which he sat securely
awhile ago is completely under water.  And now people are walking up and
down the beach and judging for themselves how far inland the chair of
King Canute is like to be moved while they and their children are looking
on, at the rate in which it is edging backward.  And it is quite too late
to go into hysterics about it.

The shore, solid, substantial, a great deal more than eighteen hundred
years old, is natural humanity.  The beach which the ocean of
knowledge--you may call it science if you like--is flowing over, is
theological humanity.  Somewhere between the Sermon on the Mount and the
teachings of Saint Augustine sin was made a transferable chattel. (I
leave the interval wide for others to make narrow.)

The doctrine of heritable guilt, with its mechanical consequences, has
done for our moral nature what the doctrine of demoniac possession has
done in barbarous times and still does among barbarous tribes for
disease.  Out of that black cloud came the lightning which struck the
compass of humanity.  Conscience, which from the dawn of moral being had
pointed to the poles of right and wrong only as the great current of will
flowed through the soul, was demagnetized, paralyzed, and knew henceforth
no fixed meridian, but stayed where the priest or the council placed it.
There is nothing to be done but to polarize the needle over again.  And
for this purpose we must study the lines of direction of all the forces
which traverse our human nature.

We must study man as we have studied stars and rocks.  We need not go, we
are told, to our sacred books for astronomy or geology or other
scientific knowledge.  Do not stop there!  Pull Canute's chair back fifty
rods at once, and do not wait until he is wet to the knees!  Say now,
bravely, as you will sooner or later have to say, that we need not go to
any ancient records for our anthropology.  Do we not all hold, at least,
that the doctrine of man's being a blighted abortion, a miserable
disappointment to his Creator, and hostile and hateful to him from his
birth, may give way to the belief that he is the latest terrestrial
manifestation of an ever upward-striving movement of divine power?  If
there lives a man who does not want to disbelieve the popular notions
about the condition and destiny of the bulk of his race, I should like to
have him look me in the face and tell me so.

I am not writing for the basement story or the nursery, and I do not
pretend to be, but I say nothing in these pages which would not be said
without fear of offence in any intelligent circle, such as clergymen of
the higher castes are in the habit of frequenting. There are teachers in
type for our grandmothers and our grandchildren who vaccinate the two
childhoods with wholesome doctrine, transmitted harmlessly from one
infant to another.  But we three men at our table have taken the disease
of thinking in the natural way.  It is an epidemic in these times, and
those who are afraid of it must shut themselves up close or they will
catch it.

I hope none of us are wanting in reverence.  One at least of us is a
regular church-goer, and believes a man may be devout and yet very free
in the expression of his opinions on the gravest subjects. There may be
some good people who think that our young friend who puts his thoughts in
verse is going sounding over perilous depths, and are frightened every
time he throws the lead.  There is nothing to be frightened at.  This is
a manly world we live in.  Our reverence is good for nothing if it does
not begin with self-respect. Occidental manhood springs from that as its
basis; Oriental manhood finds the greatest satisfaction in
self-abasement.  There is no use in trying to graft the tropical palm
upon the Northern pine.  The same divine forces underlie the growth of
both, but leaf and flower and fruit must follow the law of race, of soil,
of climate.  Whether the questions which assail my young friend have
risen in my reader's mind or not, he knows perfectly well that nobody can
keep such questions from springing up in every young mind of any force or
honesty.  As for the excellent little wretches who grow up in what they
are taught, with never a scruple or a query, Protestant or Catholic, Jew
or Mormon, Mahometan or Buddhist, they signify nothing in the
intellectual life of the race.  If the world had been wholly peopled with
such half-vitalized mental negatives, there never would have been a creed
like that of Christendom.

I entirely agree with the spirit of the verses I have looked over, in
this point at least, that a true man's allegiance is given to that which
is highest in his own nature.  He reverences truth, he loves kindness, he
respects justice.  The two first qualities he understands well enough.
But the last, justice, at least as between the Infinite and the finite,
has been so utterly dehumanized, disintegrated, decomposed, and
diabolized in passing through the minds of the half-civilized banditti
who have peopled and unpeopled the world for some scores of generations,
that it has become a mere algebraic x, and has no fixed value whatever as
a human conception.

As for power, we are outgrowing all superstition about that.  We have not
the slightest respect for it as such, and it is just as well to remember
this in all our spiritual adjustments.  We fear power when we cannot
master it; but just as far as we can master it, we make a slave and a
beast of burden of it without hesitation.  We cannot change the ebb and
flow of the tides, or the course of the seasons, but we come as near it
as we can.  We dam out the ocean, we make roses bloom in winter and water
freeze in summer.  We have no more reverence for the sun than we have for
a fish-tail gas-burner; we stare into his face with telescopes as at a
ballet-dancer with opera-glasses; we pick his rays to pieces with prisms
as if they were so many skeins of colored yarn; we tell him we do not
want his company and shut him out like a troublesome vagrant.  The gods
of the old heathen are the servants of to-day.  Neptune, Vulcan, Aolus,
and the bearer of the thunderbolt himself have stepped down from their
pedestals and put on our livery.  We cannot always master them, neither
can we always master our servant, the horse, but we have put a bridle on
the wildest natural agencies.  The mob of elemental forces is as noisy
and turbulent as ever, but the standing army of civilization keeps it
well under, except for an occasional outbreak.

When I read the Lady's letter printed some time since, I could not help
honoring the feeling which prompted her in writing it.  But while I
respect the innocent incapacity of tender age and the limitations of the
comparatively uninstructed classes, it is quite out of the question to
act as if matters of common intelligence and universal interest were the
private property of a secret society, only to be meddled with by those
who know the grip and the password.

We must get over the habit of transferring the limitations of the nervous
temperament and of hectic constitutions to the great Source of all the
mighty forces of nature, animate and inanimate.  We may confidently trust
that we have over us a Being thoroughly robust and grandly magnanimous,
in distinction from the Infinite Invalid bred in the studies of sickly
monomaniacs, who corresponds to a very common human type, but makes us
blush for him when we contrast him with a truly noble man, such as most
of us have had the privilege of knowing both in public and in private
life.

I was not a little pleased to find that the Lady, in spite of her letter,
sat through the young man's reading of portions of his poem with a good
deal of complacency.  I think I can guess what is in her mind.  She
believes, as so many women do, in that great remedy for discontent, and
doubts about humanity, and questionings of Providence, and all sorts of
youthful vagaries,--I mean the love-cure.  And she thinks, not without
some reason, that these astronomical lessons, and these readings of
poetry and daily proximity at the table, and the need of two young hearts
that have been long feeling lonely, and youth and nature and "all
impulses of soul and sense," as Coleridge has it, will bring these two
young people into closer relations than they perhaps have yet thought of;
and so that sweet lesson of loving the neighbor whom he has seen may lead
him into deeper and more trusting communion with the Friend and Father
whom he has not seen.

The Young Girl evidently did not intend that her accomplice should be a
loser by the summary act of the Member of the Haouse: I took occasion to
ask That Boy what had become of all the popguns.  He gave me to
understand that popguns were played out, but that he had got a squirt and
a whip, and considered himself better off than before.

This great world is full of mysteries.  I can comprehend the pleasure to
be got out of the hydraulic engine; but what can be the fascination of a
whip, when one has nothing to flagellate but the calves of his own legs,
I could never understand.  Yet a small riding-whip is the most popular
article with the miscellaneous New-Englander at all great
gatherings,--cattle-shows and Fourth-of-July celebrations.  If Democritus
and Heraclitus could walk arm in arm through one of these crowds, the
first would be in a broad laugh to see the multitude of young persons who
were rejoicing in the possession of one of these useless and worthless
little commodities; happy himself to see how easily others could purchase
happiness.  But the second would weep bitter tears to think what a
rayless and barren life that must be which could extract enjoyment from
the miserable flimsy wand that has such magic attraction for sauntering
youths and simpering maidens.  What a dynamometer of happiness are these
paltry toys, and what a rudimentary vertebrate must be the freckled
adolescent whose yearning for the infinite can be stayed even for a
single hour by so trifling a boon from the venal hands of the finite!

Pardon these polysyllabic reflections, Beloved, but I never contemplate
these dear fellow-creatures of ours without a delicious sense of
superiority to them and to all arrested embryos of intelligence, in which
I have no doubt you heartily sympathize with me.  It is not merely when I
look at the vacuous countenances of the mastigophori, the whip-holders,
that I enjoy this luxury (though I would not miss that holiday spectacle
for a pretty sum of money, and advise you by all means to make sure of it
next Fourth of July, if you missed it this), but I get the same pleasure
from many similar manifestations.

I delight in Regalia, so called, of the kind not worn by kings, nor
obtaining their diamonds from the mines of Golconda.  I have a passion
for those resplendent titles which are not conferred by a sovereign and
would not be the open sesame to the courts of royalty, yet which are as
opulent in impressive adjectives as any Knight of the Garter's list of
dignities.  When I have recognized in the every-day name of His Very
Worthy High Eminence of some cabalistic association, the inconspicuous
individual whose trifling indebtedness to me for value received remains
in a quiescent state and is likely long to continue so, I confess to
having experienced a thrill of pleasure.  I have smiled to think how
grand his magnificent titular appendages sounded in his own ears and what
a feeble tintinnabulation they made in mine.  The crimson sash, the broad
diagonal belt of the mounted marshal of a great procession, so cheap in
themselves, yet so entirely satisfactory to the wearer, tickle my heart's
root.

Perhaps I should have enjoyed all these weaknesses of my infantile
fellow-creatures without an afterthought, except that on a certain
literary anniversary when I tie the narrow blue and pink ribbons in my
button-hole and show my decorated bosom to the admiring public, I am
conscious of a certain sense of distinction and superiority in virtue of
that trifling addition to my personal adornments which reminds me that I
too have some embryonic fibres in my tolerably well-matured organism.

I hope I have not hurt your feelings, if you happen to be a High and
Mighty Grand Functionary in any illustrious Fraternity.  When I tell you
that a bit of ribbon in my button-hole sets my vanity prancing, I think
you cannot be grievously offended that I smile at the resonant titles
which make you something more than human in your own eyes.  I would not
for the world be mistaken for one of those literary roughs whose brass
knuckles leave their mark on the foreheads of so many inoffensive people.

There is a human sub-species characterized by the coarseness of its fibre
and the acrid nature of its intellectual secretions.  It is to a certain
extent penetrative, as all creatures are which are provided with stings.
It has an instinct which guides it to the vulnerable parts of the victim
on which it fastens.  These two qualities give it a certain degree of
power which is not to be despised.  It might perhaps be less mischievous,
but for the fact that the wound where it leaves its poison opens the
fountain from which it draws its nourishment.

Beings of this kind can be useful if they will only find their
appropriate sphere, which is not literature, but that circle of
rough-and-tumble political life where the fine-fibred men are at a
discount, where epithets find their subjects poison-proof, and the sting
which would be fatal to a literary debutant only wakes the eloquence of
the pachydermatous ward-room politician to a fiercer shriek of
declamation.

The Master got talking the other day about the difference between races
and families.  I am reminded of what he said by what I have just been
saying myself about coarse-fibred and fine-fibred people.

--We talk about a Yankee, a New-Englander,---he said,-as if all of 'em
were just the same kind of animal.  "There is knowledge and knowledge,"
said John Bunyan.  There are Yankees and Yankees.  Do you know two native
trees called pitch pine and white pine respectively? Of course you know
'em.  Well, there are pitch-pine Yankees and white-pine Yankees.  We
don't talk about the inherited differences of men quite as freely,
perhaps, as they do in the Old World, but republicanism doesn't alter the
laws of physiology.  We have a native aristocracy, a superior race, just
as plainly marked by nature as of a higher and finer grade than the
common run of people as the white pine is marked in its form, its
stature, its bark, its delicate foliage, as belonging to the nobility of
the forest; and the pitch pine, stubbed, rough, coarse-haired, as of the
plebeian order.  Only the strange thing is to see in what a capricious
way our natural nobility is distributed.  The last born nobleman I have
seen, I saw this morning; he was pulling a rope that was fastened to a
Maine schooner loaded with lumber.  I should say he was about twenty
years old, as fine a figure of a young man as you would ask to see, and
with a regular Greek outline of countenance, waving hair, that fell as if
a sculptor had massed it to copy, and a complexion as rich as a red
sunset.  I have a notion that the State of Maine breeds the natural
nobility in a larger proportion than some other States, but they spring
up in all sorts of out-of-the-way places.  The young fellow I saw this
morning had on an old flannel shirt, a pair of trowsers that meant hard
work, and a cheap cloth cap pushed back on his head so as to let the
large waves of hair straggle out over his forehead; he was tugging at his
rope with the other sailors, but upon my word I don't think I have seen a
young English nobleman of all those whom I have looked upon that answered
to the notion of "blood" so well as this young fellow did.  I suppose if
I made such a levelling confession as this in public, people would think
I was looking towards being the labor-reform candidate for President.
But I should go on and spoil my prospects by saying that I don't think
the white-pine Yankee is the more generally prevailing growth, but rather
the pitch-pine Yankee.

--The Member of the Haouse seemed to have been getting a dim idea that
all this was not exactly flattering to the huckleberry districts.  His
features betrayed the growth of this suspicion so clearly that the Master
replied to his look as if it had been a remark.  [I need hardly say that
this particular member of the General Court was a pitch-pine Yankee of
the most thoroughly characterized aspect and flavor.]

--Yes, Sir,--the Master continued,--Sir being anybody that listened,
--there is neither flattery nor offence in the views which a
physiological observer takes of the forms of life around him.  It won't
do to draw individual portraits, but the differences of natural groups of
human beings are as proper subjects of remark as those of different
breeds of horses, and if horses were Houyhnhnms I don't think they would
quarrel with us because we made a distinction between a "Morgan" and a
"Messenger." The truth is, Sir, the lean sandy soil and the droughts and
the long winters and the east-winds and the cold storms, and all sorts of
unknown local influences that we can't make out quite so plainly as
these, have a tendency to roughen the human organization and make it
coarse, something as it is with the tree I mentioned.  Some spots and
some strains of blood fight against these influences, but if I should say
right out what I think, it would be that the finest human fruit, on the
whole; and especially the finest women that we get in New England are
raised under glass.

--Good gracious!--exclaimed the Landlady, under glass!

--Give me cowcumbers raised in the open air, said the Capitalist, who was
a little hard of hearing.

--Perhaps,--I remarked,--it might be as well if you would explain this
last expression of yours.  Raising human beings under glass I take to be
a metaphorical rather than a literal statement of your meaning.

--No, Sir!--replied the Master, with energy,--I mean just what I say,
Sir.  Under glass, and with a south exposure.  During the hard season, of
course,--for in the heats of summer the tenderest hot-house plants are
not afraid of the open air.  Protection is what the transplanted Aryan
requires in this New England climate.  Keep him, and especially keep her,
in a wide street of a well-built city eight months of the year; good
solid brick walls behind her, good sheets of plate-glass, with the sun
shining warm through them, in front of her, and you have put her in the
condition of the pine-apple, from the land of which, and not from that of
the other kind of pine, her race started on its travels.  People don't
know what a gain there is to health by living in cities, the best parts
of them of course, for we know too well what the worst parts are.  In the
first place you get rid of the noxious emanations which poison so many
country localities with typhoid fever and dysentery, not wholly rid of
them, of course, but to a surprising degree.  Let me tell you a doctor's
story.  I was visiting a Western city a good many years ago; it was in
the autumn, the time when all sorts of malarious diseases are about.  The
doctor I was speaking of took me to see the cemetery just outside the
town, I don't know how much he had done to fill it, for he didn't tell
me, but I'll tell you what he did say.

"Look round," said the doctor.  "There isn't a house in all the ten-mile
circuit of country you can see over, where there isn't one person, at
least, shaking with fever and ague.  And yet you need n't be afraid of
carrying it away with you, for as long as your home is on a paved street
you are safe."

--I think it likely--the Master went on to say--that my friend the doctor
put it pretty strongly, but there is no doubt at all that while all the
country round was suffering from intermittent fever, the paved part of
the city was comparatively exempted.  What do you do when you build a
house on a damp soil, and there are damp soils pretty much everywhere?
Why you floor the cellar with cement, don't you?  Well, the soil of a
city is cemented all over, one may say, with certain qualifications of
course.  A first-rate city house is a regular sanatorium.  The only
trouble is, that the little good-for-nothings that come of utterly
used-up and worn-out stock, and ought to die, can't die, to save their
lives.  So they grow up to dilute the vigor of the race with skim-milk
vitality.  They would have died, like good children, in most average
country places; but eight months of shelter in a regulated temperature,
in a well-sunned house, in a duly moistened air, with good sidewalks to
go about on in all weather, and four months of the cream of summer and
the fresh milk of Jersey cows, make the little sham organizations--the
worm-eaten wind-falls, for that 's what they look like--hang on to the
boughs of life like "froze-n-thaws"; regular struldbrugs they come to be,
a good many of 'em.

--The Scarabee's ear was caught by that queer word of Swift's, and he
asked very innocently what kind of bugs he was speaking of, whereupon
That Boy shouted out, Straddlebugs! to his own immense amusement and the
great bewilderment of the Scarabee, who only saw that there was one of
those unintelligible breaks in the conversation which made other people
laugh, and drew back his antennae as usual, perplexed, but not amused.

I do not believe the Master had said all he was going to say on this
subject, and of course all these statements of his are more or less
one-sided.  But that some invalids do much better in cities than in the
country is indisputable, and that the frightful dysenteries and fevers
which have raged like pestilences in many of our country towns are almost
unknown in the better built sections of some of our large cities is
getting to be more generally understood since our well-to-do people have
annually emigrated in such numbers from the cemented surface of the city
to the steaming soil of some of the dangerous rural districts.  If one
should contrast the healthiest country residences with the worst city
ones the result would be all the other way, of course, so that there are
two sides to the question, which we must let the doctors pound in their
great mortar, infuse and strain, hoping that they will present us with
the clear solution when they have got through these processes.  One of
our chief wants is a complete sanitary map of every State in the Union.

The balance of our table, as the reader has no doubt observed, has been
deranged by the withdrawal of the Man of Letters, so called, and only the
side of the deficiency changed by the removal of the Young Astronomer
into our neighborhood.  The fact that there was a vacant chair on the
side opposite us had by no means escaped the notice of That Boy.  He had
taken advantage of his opportunity and invited in a schoolmate whom he
evidently looked upon as a great personage.  This boy or youth was a good
deal older than himself and stood to him apparently in the light of a
patron and instructor in the ways of life.  A very jaunty, knowing young
gentleman he was, good-looking, smartly dressed, smooth-checked as yet,
curly-haired, with a roguish eye, a sagacious wink, a ready tongue, as I
soon found out; and as I learned could catch a ball on the fly with any
boy of his age; not quarrelsome, but, if he had to strike, hit from the
shoulder; the pride of his father (who was a man of property and a civic
dignitary), and answering to the name of Johnny.

I was a little surprised at the liberty That Boy had taken in introducing
an extra peptic element at our table, reflecting as I did that a certain
number of avoirdupois ounces of nutriment which the visitor would dispose
of corresponded to a very appreciable pecuniary amount, so that he was
levying a contribution upon our Landlady which she might be inclined to
complain of.  For the Caput mortuum (or deadhead, in vulgar phrase) is
apt to be furnished with a Venter vivus, or, as we may say, a lively
appetite.  But the Landlady welcomed the new-comer very heartily.

--Why! how--do--you--do Johnny?! with the notes of interrogation and of
admiration both together, as here represented.

Johnny signified that he was doing about as well as could be expected
under the circumstances, having just had a little difference with a young
person whom he spoke of as "Pewter-jaw" (I suppose he had worn a
dentist's tooth-straightening contrivance during his second dentition),
which youth he had finished off, as he said, in good shape, but at the
expense of a slight epistaxis, we will translate his vernacular
expression.

--The three ladies all looked sympathetic, but there did not seem to be
any great occasion for it, as the boy had come out all right, and seemed
to be in the best of spirits.

-And how is your father and your mother? asked the Landlady.

-Oh, the Governor and the Head Centre?  A 1, both of 'em.  Prime order
for shipping,--warranted to stand any climate.  The Governor says he
weighs a hunderd and seventy-five pounds.  Got a chin-tuft just like
Ed'in Forrest.  D'd y' ever see Ed'in Forrest play Metamora?  Bully, I
tell you!  My old gentleman means to be Mayor or Governor or President or
something or other before he goes off the handle, you'd better b'lieve.
He's smart,--and I've heard folks say I take after him.

--Somehow or other I felt as if I had seen this boy before, or known
something about him.  Where did he get those expressions "A 1" and
"prime" and so on?  They must have come from somebody who has been in the
retail dry-goods business, or something of that nature.  I have certain
vague reminiscences that carry me back to the early times of this
boardinghouse.---Johnny.---Landlady knows his father well.

---Boarded with her, no doubt.---There was somebody by the name of John,
I remember perfectly well, lived with her.  I remember both my friends
mentioned him, one of them very often.  I wonder if this boy isn't a son
of his!  I asked the Landlady after breakfast whether this was not, as I
had suspected, the son of that former boarder.

--To be sure he is,--she answered,--and jest such a good-natur'd sort of
creatur' as his father was.  I always liked John, as we used to call his
father.  He did love fun, but he was a good soul, and stood by me when I
was in trouble, always.  He went into business on his own account after a
while, and got merried, and settled down into a family man.  They tell me
he is an amazing smart business man,--grown wealthy, and his wife's
father left her money.  But I can't help calling him John,--law, we never
thought of calling him anything else, and he always laughs and says,
"That's right."  This is his oldest son, and everybody calls him Johnny.
That Boy of ours goes to the same school with his boy, and thinks there
never was anybody like him,--you see there was a boy undertook to impose
on our boy, and Johnny gave the other boy a good licking, and ever since
that he is always wanting to have Johnny round with him and bring him
here with him,--and when those two boys get together, there never was
boys that was so chock full of fun and sometimes mischief, but not very
bad mischief, as those two boys be.  But I like to have him come once in
a while when there is room at the table, as there is now, for it puts me
in mind of the old times, when my old boarders was all round me, that I
used to think so much of,--not that my boarders that I have now a'nt very
nice people, but I did think a dreadful sight of the gentleman that made
that first book; it helped me on in the world more than ever he knew
of,--for it was as good as one of them Brandreth's pills advertisements,
and did n't cost me a cent, and that young lady he merried too, she was
nothing but a poor young schoolma'am when she come to my house, and
now--and she deserved it all too; for she was always just the same, rich
or poor, and she is n't a bit prouder now she wears a camel's-hair shawl,
than she was when I used to lend her a woollen one to keep her poor dear
little shoulders warm when she had to go out and it was storming,--and
then there was that old gentleman,--I can't speak about him, for I never
knew how good he was till his will was opened, and then it was too late
to thank him....

I respected the feeling which caused the interval of silence, and found
my own eyes moistened as I remembered how long it was since that friend
of ours was sitting in the chair where I now sit, and what a tidal wave
of change has swept over the world and more especially over this great
land of ours, since he opened his lips and found so many kind listeners.

The Young Astronomer has read us another extract from his manuscript. I
ran my eye over it, and so far as I have noticed it is correct enough in
its versification.  I suppose we are getting gradually over our
hemispherical provincialism, which allowed a set of monks to pull their
hoods over our eyes and tell us there was no meaning in any religious
symbolism but our own.  If I am mistaken about this advance I am very
glad to print the young man's somewhat outspoken lines to help us in that
direction.

               WIND-CLOUDS AND STAR-DRIFTS.

                         VI

     The time is racked with birth-pangs; every hour
     Brings forth some gasping truth, and truth new-born
     Looks a misshapen and untimely growth,
     The terror of the household and its shame,
     A monster coiling in its nurse's lap
     That some would strangle, some would only starve;
     But still it breathes, and passed from hand to hand,
     And suckled at a hundred half-clad breasts,
     Comes slowly to its stature and its form,
     Calms the rough ridges of its dragon-scales,
     Changes to shining locks its snaky hair,
     And moves transfigured into angel guise,
     Welcomed by all that cursed its hour of birth,
     And folded in the same encircling arms
     That cast it like a serpent from their hold!

     If thou wouldst live in honor, die in peace,
     Have the fine words the marble-workers learn
     To carve so well, upon thy funeral-stone,
     And earn a fair obituary, dressed
     In all the many-colored robes of praise,
     Be deafer than the adder to the cry
     Of that same foundling truth, until it grows
     To seemly favor, and at length has won
     The smiles of hard-mouthed men and light-upped dames,
     Then snatch it from its meagre nurse's breast,
     Fold it in silk and give it food from gold;
     So shalt thou share its glory when at last
     It drops its mortal vesture, and revealed
     In all the splendor of its heavenly form,
     Spreads on the startled air its mighty wings!

     Alas! how much that seemed immortal truth
     That heroes fought for, martyrs died to save,
     Reveals its earth-born lineage, growing old
     And limping in its march, its wings unplumed,
     Its heavenly semblance faded like a dream!

     Here in this painted casket, just unsealed,
     Lies what was once a breathing shape like thine,
     Once loved as thou art loved; there beamed the eyes
     That looked on Memphis in its hour of pride,
     That saw the walls of hundred-gated Thebes,
     And all the mirrored glories of the Nile.
     See how they toiled that all-consuming time
     Might leave the frame immortal in its tomb;
     Filled it with fragrant balms and odorous gums
     That still diffuse their sweetness through the air,
     And wound and wound with patient fold on fold
     The flaxen bands thy hand has rudely torn!
     Perchance thou yet canst see the faded stain
     Of the sad mourner's tear.

                              But what is this?
     The sacred beetle, bound upon the breast
     Of the blind heathen!  Snatch the curious prize,
     Give it a place among thy treasured spoils
     Fossil and relic,--corals, encrinites,
     The fly in amber and the fish in stone,
     The twisted circlet of Etruscan gold,
     Medal, intaglio, poniard, poison-ring,
    --Place for the Memphian beetle with thine hoard!

     Ah! longer than thy creed has blest the world
     This toy, thus ravished from thy brother's breast,
     Was to the heart of Mizraim as divine,
     As holy, as the symbol that we lay
     On the still bosom of our white-robed dead,
     And raise above their dust that all may know
     Here sleeps an heir of glory.  Loving friends,
     With tears of trembling faith and choking sobs,
     And prayers to those who judge of mortal deeds,
     Wrapped this poor image in the cerement's fold
     That Isis and Osiris, friends of man,
     Might know their own and claim the ransomed soul

     An idol?  Man was born to worship such!
     An idol is an image of his thought;
     Sometimes he carves it out of gleaming stone,
     And sometimes moulds it out of glittering gold,
     Or rounds it in a mighty frescoed dome,
     Or lifts it heavenward in a lofty spire,
     Or shapes it in a cunning frame of words,
     Or pays his priest to make it day by day;
     For sense must have its god as well as soul;
     A new-born Dian calls for silver shrines,
     And Egypt's holiest symbol is our own,
     The sign we worship as did they of old
     When Isis and Osiris ruled the world.

     Let us be true to our most subtle selves,
     We long to have our idols like the rest.
     Think! when the men of Israel had their God
     Encamped among them, talking with their chief,
     Leading them in the pillar of the cloud
     And watching o'er them in the shaft of fire,
     They still must have an image; still they longed
     For somewhat of substantial, solid form
     Whereon to hang their garlands, and to fix
     Their wandering thoughts, and gain a stronger hold
     For their uncertain faith, not yet assured
     If those same meteors of the day and night
     Were not mere exhalations of the soil.

     Are we less earthly than the chosen race?
     Are we more neighbors of the living God
     Than they who gathered manna every morn,
     Reaping where none had sown, and heard the voice
     Of him who met the Highest in the mount,
     And brought them tables, graven with His hand?
     Yet these must have their idol, brought their gold,
     That star-browed Apis might be god again;
     Yea, from their ears the women brake the rings
     That lent such splendors to the gypsy brown
     Of sunburnt cheeks,--what more could woman do
     To show her pious zeal?  They went astray,
     But nature led them as it leads us all.

     We too, who mock at Israel's golden calf
     And scoff at Egypt's sacred scarabee,
     Would have our amulets to clasp and kiss,
     And flood with rapturous tears, and bear with us
     To be our dear companions in the dust,
     Such magic works an image in our souls!

     Man is an embryo; see at twenty years
     His bones, the columns that uphold his frame
     Not yet cemented, shaft and capital,
     Mere fragments of the temple incomplete.
     At twoscore, threescore, is he then full grown?
     Nay, still a child, and as the little maids
     Dress and undress their puppets, so he tries
     To dress a lifeless creed, as if it lived,
     And change its raiment when the world cries shame!
     We smile to see our little ones at play
     So grave, so thoughtful, with maternal care
     Nursing the wisps of rags they call their babes;
     Does He not smile who sees us with the toys
     We call by sacred names, and idly feign
     To be what we have called them?
     He is still The Father of this helpless nursery-brood,
     Whose second childhood joins so close its first,
     That in the crowding, hurrying years between
     We scarce have trained our senses to their task
     Before the gathering mist has dimmed our eyes,
     And with our hollowed palm we help our ear,
     And trace with trembling hand our wrinkled names,
     And then begin to tell our stories o'er,
     And see--not hear-the whispering lips that say,
     "You know--?  Your father knew him.--This is he,
     Tottering and leaning on the hireling's arm,--"
     And so, at length, disrobed of all that clad
     The simple life we share with weed and worm,
     Go to our cradles, naked as we came.




XI

I suppose there would have been even more remarks upon the growing
intimacy of the Young Astronomer and his pupil, if the curiosity of the
boarders had not in the mean time been so much excited at the apparently
close relation which had sprung up between the Register of Deeds and the
Lady.  It was really hard to tell what to make of it. The Register
appeared at the table in a new coat.  Suspicious.  The Lady was evidently
deeply interested in him, if we could judge by the frequency and the
length of their interviews.  On at least one occasion he has brought a
lawyer with him, which naturally suggested the idea that there were some
property arrangements to be attended to, in case, as seems probable
against all reasons to the contrary, these two estimable persons, so
utterly unfitted, as one would say, to each other, contemplated an
alliance.  It is no pleasure to me to record an arrangement of this kind.
I frankly confess I do not know what to make of it.  With her tastes and
breeding, it is the last thing that I should have thought of,--her
uniting herself with this most commonplace and mechanical person, who
cannot even offer her the elegances and luxuries to which she might seem
entitled on changing her condition.

While I was thus interested and puzzled I received an unexpected visit
from our Landlady.  She was evidently excited, and by some event which
was of a happy nature, for her countenance was beaming and she seemed
impatient to communicate what she had to tell. Impatient or not, she must
wait a moment, while I say a word about her.  Our Landlady is as good a
creature as ever lived.  She is a little negligent of grammar at times,
and will get a wrong word now and then; she is garrulous, circumstantial,
associates facts by their accidental cohesion rather than by their vital
affinities, is given to choking and tears on slight occasions, but she
has a warm heart, and feels to her boarders as if they were her
blood-relations. She began her conversation abruptly.--I expect I'm a
going to lose one of my boarders,--she said.

--You don't seem very unhappy about it, madam,--I answered.---We all took
it easily when the person who sat on our side of the table quitted us in
such a hurry, but I do not think there is anybody left that either you or
the boarders want to get rid of--unless it is myself,--I added modestly.

--You! said the Landlady--you!  No indeed.  When I have a quiet boarder
that 's a small eater, I don't want to lose him.  You don't make trouble,
you don't find fault with your vit--[Dr. Benjamin had schooled his parent
on this point and she altered the word] with your food, and you know when
you 've had enough.

--I really felt proud of this eulogy, which embraces the most desirable
excellences of a human being in the capacity of boarder.

The Landlady began again.--I'm going to lose--at least, I suppose I
shall--one of the best boarders I ever had,--that Lady that's been with
me so long.

--I thought there was something going on between her and the Register,--I
said.

--Something!  I should think there was!  About three months ago he began
making her acquaintance.  I thought there was something particular.  I
did n't quite like to watch 'em very close; but I could n't help
overbearing some of the things he said to her, for, you see, he used to
follow her up into the parlor, they talked pretty low, but I could catch
a word now and then.  I heard him say something to her one day about
"bettering her condition," and she seemed to be thinking very hard about
it, and turning of it over in her mind, and I said to myself, She does
n't want to take up with him, but she feels dreadful poor, and perhaps he
has been saving and has got money in the bank, and she does n't want to
throw away a chance of bettering herself without thinking it over.  But
dear me,--says I to myself,--to think of her walking up the broad aisle
into meeting alongside of such a homely, rusty-looking creatur' as that!
But there 's no telling what folks will do when poverty has got hold of
'em.

--Well, so I thought she was waiting to make up her mind, and he was
hanging on in hopes she'd come round at last, as women do half the time,
for they don't know their own minds and the wind blows both ways at once
with 'em as the smoke blows out of the tall chimlies,--east out of this
one and west out of that,--so it's no use looking at 'em to know what the
weather is.

--But yesterday she comes up to me after breakfast, and asks me to go up
with her into her little room.  Now, says I to myself, I shall hear all
about it.  I saw she looked as if she'd got some of her trouble off her
mind, and I guessed that it was settled, and so, says I to myself, I must
wish her joy and hope it's all for the best, whatever I think about it.

--Well, she asked me to set down, and then she begun.  She said that she
was expecting to have a change in her condition of life, and had asked me
up so that I might' have the first news of it.  I am sure--says I--I
wish you both joy.  Merriage is a blessed thing when folks is well
sorted, and it is an honorable thing, and the first meracle was at the
merriage in Canaan.  It brings a great sight of happiness with it, as
I've had a chance of knowing, for my hus--

The Landlady showed her usual tendency to "break" from the conversational
pace just at this point, but managed to rein in the rebellious diaphragm,
and resumed her narrative.

--Merriage!--says she,--pray who has said anything about merriage?--I
beg your pardon, ma'am,--says I,--I thought you had spoke of changing
your condition and I--She looked so I stopped right short.

-Don't say another word, says she, but jest listen to what I am going to
tell you.

--My friend, says she, that you have seen with me so often lately, was
hunting among his old Record books, when all at once he come across an
old deed that was made by somebody that had my family name. He took it
into his head to read it over, and he found there was some kind of a
condition that if it was n't kept, the property would all go back to them
that was the heirs of the one that gave the deed, and that he found out
was me.  Something or other put it into his head, says she, that the
company that owned the property--it was ever so rich a company and owned
land all round everywhere--hadn't kept to the conditions.  So he went to
work, says she, and hunted through his books and he inquired all round,
and he found out pretty much all about it, and at last he come to me--it
's my boarder, you know, that says all this--and says he, Ma'am, says he,
if you have any kind of fancy for being a rich woman you've only got to
say so.  I didn't know what he meant, and I began to think, says she, he
must be crazy. But he explained it all to me, how I'd nothing to do but
go to court and I could get a sight of property back.  Well, so she went
on telling me--there was ever so much more that I suppose was all plain
enough, but I don't remember it all--only I know my boarder was a good
deal worried at first at the thought of taking money that other people
thought was theirs, and the Register he had to talk to her, and he
brought a lawyer and he talked to her, and her friends they talked to
her, and the upshot of it all was that the company agreed to settle the
business by paying her, well, I don't know just how much, but enough to
make her one of the rich folks again.

I may as well add here that, as I have since learned, this is one of the
most important cases of releasing right of reentry for condition broken
which has been settled by arbitration for a considerable period.  If I am
not mistaken the Register of Deeds will get something more than a new
coat out of this business, for the Lady very justly attributes her change
of fortunes to his sagacity and his activity in following up the hint he
had come across by mere accident.

So my supernumerary fellow-boarder, whom I would have dispensed with as a
cumberer of the table, has proved a ministering angel to one of the
personages whom I most cared for.

One would have thought that the most scrupulous person need not have
hesitated in asserting an unquestioned legal and equitable claim simply
because it had lain a certain number of years in abeyance. But before the
Lady could make up her mind to accept her good fortune she had been kept
awake many nights in doubt and inward debate whether she should avail
herself of her rights.  If it had been private property, so that another
person must be made poor that she should become rich, she would have
lived and died in want rather than claim her own.  I do not think any of
us would like to turn out the possessor of a fine estate enjoyed for two
or three generations on the faith of unquestioned ownership by making use
of some old forgotten instrument, which accident had thrown in our way.

But it was all nonsense to indulge in any sentiment in a case like this,
where it was not only a right, but a duty which she owed herself and
others in relation with her, to accept what Providence, as it appeared,
had thrust upon her, and when no suffering would be occasioned to
anybody.  Common sense told her not to refuse it.  So did several of her
rich friends, who remembered about this time that they had not called
upon her for a good while, and among them Mrs. Midas Goldenrod.

Never had that lady's carriage stood before the door of our
boarding-house so long, never had it stopped so often, as since the
revelation which had come from the Registry of Deeds.  Mrs. Midas
Goldenrod was not a bad woman, but she loved and hated in too exclusive
and fastidious a way to allow us to consider her as representing the
highest ideal of womanhood.  She hated narrow ill-ventilated courts,
where there was nothing to see if one looked out of the window but old
men in dressing-gowns and old women in caps; she hated little dark rooms
with air-tight stoves in them; she hated rusty bombazine gowns and last
year's bonnets; she hated gloves that were not as fresh as new-laid eggs,
and shoes that had grown bulgy and wrinkled in service; she hated common
crockeryware and teaspoons of slight constitution; she hated second
appearances on the dinner-table; she hated coarse napkins and
table-cloths; she hated to ride in the horsecars; she hated to walk
except for short distances, when she was tired of sitting in her
carriage.  She loved with sincere and undisguised affection a spacious
city mansion and a charming country villa, with a seaside cottage for a
couple of months or so; she loved a perfectly appointed household, a cook
who was up to all kinds of salmis and vol-au-vents, a French maid, and a
stylish-looking coachman, and the rest of the people necessary to help
one live in a decent manner; she loved pictures that other people said
were first-rate, and which had at least cost first-rate prices; she loved
books with handsome backs, in showy cases; she loved heavy and richly
wought plate; fine linen and plenty of it; dresses from Paris frequently,
and as many as could be got in without troubling the customhouse; Russia
sables and Venetian point-lace; diamonds, and good big ones; and,
speaking generally, she loved dear things in distinction from cheap ones,
the real article and not the economical substitute.

For the life of me I cannot see anything Satanic in all this.  Tell me,
Beloved, only between ourselves, if some of these things are not
desirable enough in their way, and if you and I could not make up our
minds to put up with some of the least objectionable of them without any
great inward struggle?  Even in the matter of ornaments there is
something to be said.  Why should we be told that the New Jerusalem is
paved with gold, and that its twelve gates are each of them a pearl, and
that its foundations are garnished with sapphires and emeralds and all
manner of precious stones, if these are not among the most desirable of
objects?  And is there anything very strange in the fact that many a
daughter of earth finds it a sweet foretaste of heaven to wear about her
frail earthly tabernacle these glittering reminders of the celestial
city?

Mrs.  Midas Goldenrod was not so entirely peculiar and anomalous in her
likes and dislikes; the only trouble was that she mixed up these
accidents of life too much with life itself, which is so often serenely
or actively noble and happy without reference to them.  She valued
persons chiefly according to their external conditions, and of course the
very moment her relative, the Lady of our breakfast-table, began to find
herself in a streak of sunshine she came forward with a lighted candle to
show her which way her path lay before her.

The Lady saw all this, how plainly, how painfully! yet she exercised a
true charity for the weakness of her relative.  Sensible people have as
much consideration for the frailties of the rich as for those of the
poor.  There is a good deal of excuse for them.  Even you and I,
philosophers and philanthropists as we may think ourselves, have a
dislike for the enforced economies, proper and honorable though they
certainly are, of those who are two or three degrees below us in the
scale of agreeable living.

--These are very worthy persons you have been living with, my dear,
--said Mrs. Midas--[the "My dear" was an expression which had flowered
out more luxuriantly than ever before in the new streak of sunshine]
--eminently respectable parties, I have no question, but then we shall
want you to move as soon as possible to our quarter of the town, where we
can see more of you than we have been able to in this queer place.

It was not very pleasant to listen to this kind of talk, but the Lady
remembered her annual bouquet, and her occasional visits from the rich
lady, and restrained the inclination to remind her of the humble sphere
from which she herself, the rich and patronizing personage, had worked
her way up (if it was up) into that world which she seemed to think was
the only one where a human being could find life worth having.  Her cheek
flushed a little, however, as she said to Mrs. Midas that she felt
attached to the place where she had been living so long.  She doubted,
she was pleased to say, whether she should find better company in any
circle she was like to move in than she left behind her at our
boarding-house.  I give the old Master the credit of this compliment.  If
one does not agree with half of what he says, at any rate he always has
something to say, and entertains and lets out opinions and whims and
notions of one kind and another that one can quarrel with if he is out of
humor, or carry away to think about if he happens to be in the receptive
mood.

But the Lady expressed still more strongly the regret she should feel at
leaving her young friend, our Scheherezade.  I cannot wonder at this.
The Young Girl has lost what little playfulness she had in the earlier
months of my acquaintance with her.  I often read her stories partly from
my interest in her, and partly because I find merit enough in them to
deserve something, better than the rough handling they got from her
coarse-fibred critic, whoever he was.  I see evidence that her thoughts
are wandering from her task, that she has fits of melancholy, and bursts
of tremulous excitement, and that she has as much as she can do to keep
herself at all to her stated, inevitable, and sometimes almost despairing
literary labor.  I have had some acquaintance with vital phenomena of
this kind, and know something of the nervous nature of young women and
its "magnetic storms," if I may borrow an expression from the physicists,
to indicate the perturbations to which they are liable.  She is more in
need of friendship and counsel now than ever before, it seems to me, and
I cannot bear to think that the Lady, who has become like a mother to
her, is to leave her to her own guidance.

It is plain enough what is at the bottom of this disturbance.  The
astronomical lessons she has been taking have become interesting enough
to absorb too much of her thoughts, and she finds them wandering to the
stars or elsewhere, when they should be working quietly in the editor's
harness.

The Landlady has her own views on this matter which she communicated to
me something as follows:

--I don't quite like to tell folks what a lucky place my boarding-house
is, for fear I should have all sorts of people crowding in to be my
boarders for the sake of their chances.  Folks come here poor and they go
away rich.  Young women come here without a friend in the world, and the
next thing that happens is a gentleman steps up to 'em and says, "If
you'll take me for your pardner for life, I'll give you a good home and
love you ever so much besides"; and off goes my young lady-boarder into a
fine three-story house, as grand as the governor's wife, with everything
to make her comfortable, and a husband to care for her into the bargain.
That's the way it is with the young ladies that comes to board with me,
ever since the gentleman that wrote the first book that advertised my
establishment (and never charged me a cent for it neither) merried the
Schoolma'am. And I think but that's between you and me--that it 's going
to be the same thing right over again between that young gentleman and
this young girl here--if she doos n't kill herself with writing for them
news papers,--it 's too bad they don't pay her more for writing her
stories, for I read one of 'em that made me cry so the Doctor--my Doctor
Benjamin--said, "Ma, what makes your eyes look so?" and wanted to rig a
machine up and look at 'em, but I told him what the matter was, and that
he needn't fix up his peeking contrivances on my account,--anyhow she's a
nice young woman as ever lived, and as industrious with that pen of hers
as if she was at work with a sewing-machine,--and there ain't much
difference, for that matter, between sewing on shirts and writing on
stories,--one way you work with your foot, and the other way you work
with your fingers, but I rather guess there's more headache in the
stories than there is in the stitches, because you don't have to think
quite so hard while your foot's going as you do when your fingers is at
work, scratch, scratch, scratch, scribble, scribble, scribble.

It occurred to me that this last suggestion of the Landlady was worth
considering by the soft-handed, broadcloth-clad spouters to the laboring
classes,--so called in distinction from the idle people who only contrive
the machinery and discover the processes and lay out the work and draw
the charts and organize the various movements which keep the world going
and make it tolerable.  The organ-blower works harder with his muscles,
for that matter, than the organ player, and may perhaps be exasperated
into thinking himself a downtrodden martyr because he does not receive
the same pay for his services.

I will not pretend that it needed the Landlady's sagacious guess about
the Young Astronomer and his pupil to open my eyes to certain
possibilities, if not probabilities, in that direction.  Our Scheherezade
kept on writing her stories according to agreement, so many pages for so
many dollars, but some of her readers began to complain that they could
not always follow her quite so well as in her earlier efforts.  It seemed
as if she must have fits of absence. In one instance her heroine began as
a blonde and finished as a brunette; not in consequence of the use of any
cosmetic, but through simple inadvertence.  At last it happened in one of
her stories that a prominent character who had been killed in an early
page, not equivocally, but mortally, definitively killed, done for, and
disposed of, reappeared as if nothing had happened towards the close of
her narrative.  Her mind was on something else, and she had got two
stories mixed up and sent her manuscript without having looked it over.
She told this mishap to the Lady, as something she was dreadfully ashamed
of and could not possibly account for.  It had cost her a sharp note from
the publisher, and would be as good as a dinner to some half-starved
Bohemian of the critical press.

The Lady listened to all this very thoughtfully, looking at her with
great tenderness, and said, "My poor child!" Not another word then, but
her silence meant a good deal.

When a man holds his tongue it does not signify much.  But when a woman
dispenses with the office of that mighty member, when she sheathes her
natural weapon at a trying moment, it means that she trusts to still more
formidable enginery; to tears it may be, a solvent more powerful than
that with which Hannibal softened the Alpine rocks, or to the heaving
bosom, the sight of which has subdued so many stout natures, or, it may
be, to a sympathizing, quieting look which says "Peace, be still!" to the
winds and waves of the little inland ocean, in a language that means more
than speech.

While these matters were going on the Master and I had many talks on many
subjects.  He had found me a pretty good listener, for I had learned that
the best way of getting at what was worth having from him was to wind him
up with a question and let him run down all of himself.  It is easy to
turn a good talker into an insufferable bore by contradicting him, and
putting questions for him to stumble over,--that is, if he is not a bore
already, as "good talkers" are apt to be, except now and then.

We had been discussing some knotty points one morning when he said all at
once:

--Come into my library with me.  I want to read you some new passages
from an interleaved copy of my book.  You haven't read the printed part
yet.  I gave you a copy of it, but nobody reads a book that is given to
him.  Of course not.  Nobody but a fool expects him to.  He reads a
little in it here and there, perhaps, and he cuts all the leaves if he
cares enough about the writer, who will be sure to call on him some day,
and if he is left alone in his library for five minutes will have hunted
every corner of it until he has found the book he sent,--if it is to be
found at all, which does n't always happen, if there's a penal colony
anywhere in a garret or closet for typographical offenders and vagrants.

--What do you do when you receive a book you don't want, from the
author?--said I.

--Give him a good-natured adjective or two if I can, and thank him, and
tell him I am lying under a sense of obligation to him.

--That is as good an excuse for lying as almost any,--I said.

--Yes, but look out for the fellows that send you a copy of their book to
trap you into writing a bookseller's advertisement for it.  I got caught
so once, and never heard the end of it and never shall hear it.---He took
down an elegantly bound volume, on opening which appeared a flourishing
and eminently flattering dedication to himself.---There,--said he, what
could I do less than acknowledge such a compliment in polite terms, and
hope and expect the book would prove successful, and so forth and so
forth?  Well, I get a letter every few months from some new locality
where the man that made that book is covering the fences with his
placards, asking me whether I wrote that letter which he keeps in
stereotype and has kept so any time these dozen or fifteen years.  Animus
tuus oculus, as the freshmen used to say.  If her Majesty, the Queen of
England, sends you a copy of her "Leaves from the Journal of Our Life in
the Highlands," be sure you mark your letter of thanks for it Private!

We had got comfortably seated in his library in the mean time, and the
Master had taken up his book.  I noticed that every other page was left
blank, and that he had written in a good deal of new matter.

--I tell you what,--he said,--there 's so much intelligence about
nowadays in books and newspapers and talk that it's mighty hard to write
without getting something or other worth listening to into your essay or
your volume.  The foolishest book is a kind of leaky boat on a sea of
wisdom; some of the wisdom will get in anyhow.  Every now and then I find
something in my book that seems so good to me, I can't help thinking it
must have leaked in.  I suppose other people discover that it came
through a leak, full as soon as I do.  You must write a book or two to
find out how much and how little you know and have to say.  Then you must
read some notices of it by somebody that loves you and one or two by
somebody that hates you.  You 'll find yourself a very odd piece of
property after you 've been through these experiences.  They 're trying
to the constitution; I'm always glad to hear that a friend is as well as
can be expected after he 's had a book.

You must n't think there are no better things in these pages of mine than
the ones I'm going to read you, but you may come across something here
that I forgot to say when we were talking over these matters.

He began, reading from the manuscript portion of his book:

--We find it hard to get and to keep any private property in thought.
Other people are all the time saying the same things we are hoarding to
say when we get ready.  [He looked up from his book just here and said,
"Don't be afraid, I am not going to quote Pereant."] One of our old
boarders--the one that called himself "The Professor" I think it
was--said some pretty audacious things about what he called "pathological
piety," as I remember, in one of his papers.  And here comes along Mr.
Galton, and shows in detail from religious biographies that "there is a
frequent correlation between an unusually devout disposition and a weak
constitution."  Neither of them appeared to know that John Bunyan had got
at the same fact long before them.  He tells us, "The more healthy the
lusty man is, the more prone he is unto evil."  If the converse is true,
no wonder that good people, according to Bunyan, are always in trouble
and terror, for he says,

    "A Christian man is never long at ease;
     When one fright is gone, another doth him seize."

If invalidism and the nervous timidity which is apt to go with it are
elements of spiritual superiority, it follows that pathology and
toxicology should form a most important part of a theological education,
so that a divine might know how to keep a parish in a state of chronic
bad health in order that it might be virtuous.

It is a great mistake to think that a man's religion is going to rid him
of his natural qualities.  "Bishop Hall" (as you may remember to have
seen quoted elsewhere) "prefers Nature before Grace in the Election of a
wife, because, saith he, it will be a hard Task, where the Nature is
peevish and froward, for Grace to make an entire conquest while Life
lasteth."

"Nature" and "Grace" have been contrasted with each other in a way not
very respectful to the Divine omnipotence.  Kings and queens reign "by
the Grace of God," but a sweet, docile, pious disposition, such as is
born in some children and grows up with them,--that congenital gift which
good Bishop Hall would look for in a wife,--is attributed to "Nature."
In fact "Nature" and "Grace," as handled by the scholastics, are nothing
more nor less than two hostile Divinities in the Pantheon of
post-classical polytheism.

What is the secret of the profound interest which "Darwinism" has excited
in the minds and hearts of more persons than dare to confess their doubts
and hopes?  It is because it restores "Nature" to its place as a true
divine manifestation.  It is that it removes the traditional curse from
that helpless infant lying in its mother's arms.  It is that it lifts
from the shoulders of man the responsibility for the fact of death.  It
is that, if it is true, woman can no longer be taunted with having
brought down on herself the pangs which make her sex a martyrdom.  If
development upward is the general law of the race; if we have grown by
natural evolution out of the cave-man, and even less human forms of life,
we have everything to hope from the future.  That the question can be
discussed without offence shows that we are entering on a new era, a
Revival greater than that of Letters, the Revival of Humanity.

The prevalent view of "Nature" has been akin to that which long reigned
with reference to disease.  This used to be considered as a distinct
entity apart from the processes of life, of which it is one of the
manifestations.  It was a kind of demon to be attacked with things of
odious taste and smell; to be fumigated out of the system as the evil
spirit was driven from the bridal-chamber in the story of Tobit.  The
Doctor of earlier days, even as I can remember him, used to exorcise the
demon of disease with recipes of odor as potent as that of the angel's
diabolifuge,--the smoke from a fish's heart and liver, duly burned,--"the
which smell when the evil spirit had smelled he fled into the uttermost
parts of Egypt."  The very moment that disease passes into the category
of vital processes, and is recognized as an occurrence absolutely
necessary, inevitable, and as one may say, normal under certain given
conditions of constitution and circumstance, the medicine-man loses his
half-miraculous endowments.  The mythical serpent is untwined from the
staff of Esculapius, which thenceforth becomes a useful walking-stick,
and does not pretend to be anything more.

Sin, like disease, is a vital process.  It is a function, and not an
entity.  It must be studied as a section of anthropology.  No
preconceived idea must be allowed to interfere with our investigation of
the deranged spiritual function, any more than the old ideas of
demoniacal possession must be allowed to interfere with our study of
epilepsy.  Spiritual pathology is a proper subject for direct observation
and analysis, like any other subject involving a series of living
actions.

In these living actions everything is progressive.  There are sudden
changes of character in what is called "conversion" which, at first,
hardly seem to come into line with the common laws of evolution.  But
these changes have been long preparing, and it is just as much in the
order of nature that certain characters should burst all at once from the
rule of evil propensities, as it is that the evening primrose should
explode, as it were, into bloom with audible sound, as you may read in
Keats's Endymion, or observe in your own garden.

There is a continual tendency in men to fence in themselves and a few of
their neighbors who agree with them in their ideas, as if they were an
exception to their race.  We must not allow any creed or religion
whatsoever to confiscate to its own private use and benefit the virtues
which belong to our common humanity.  The Good Samaritan helped his
wounded neighbor simply because he was a suffering fellow-creature.  Do
you think your charitable act is more acceptable than the Good
Samaritan's, because you do it in the name of Him who made the memory of
that kind man immortal?  Do you mean that you would not give the cup of
cold water for the sake simply and solely of the poor, suffering
fellow-mortal, as willingly as you now do, professing to give it for the
sake of Him who is not thirsty or in need of any help of yours?  We must
ask questions like this, if we are to claim for our common nature what
belongs to it.

The scientific study of man is the most difficult of all branches of
knowledge.  It requires, in the first place, an entire new terminology to
get rid of that enormous load of prejudices with which every term applied
to the malformations, the functional disturbances, and the organic
diseases of the moral nature is at present burdened. Take that one word
Sin, for instance: all those who have studied the subject from nature and
not from books know perfectly well that a certain fraction of what is so
called is nothing more or less than a symptom of hysteria; that another
fraction is the index of a limited degree of insanity; that still another
is the result of a congenital tendency which removes the act we sit in
judgment upon from the sphere of self-determination, if not entirely, at
least to such an extent that the subject of the tendency cannot be judged
by any normal standard.

To study nature without fear is possible, but without reproach,
impossible.  The man who worships in the temple of knowledge must carry
his arms with him as our Puritan fathers had to do when they gathered in
their first rude meeting-houses.  It is a fearful thing to meddle with
the ark which holds the mysteries of creation.  I remember that when I
was a child the tradition was whispered round among us little folks that
if we tried to count the stars we should drop down dead.  Nevertheless,
the stars have been counted and the astronomer has survived.  This
nursery legend is the child's version of those superstitions which would
have strangled in their cradles the young sciences now adolescent and
able to take care of themselves, and which, no longer daring to attack
these, are watching with hostile aspect the rapid growth of the
comparatively new science of man.

The real difficulty of the student of nature at this time is to reconcile
absolute freedom and perfect fearlessness with that respect for the past,
that reverence, for the spirit of reverence wherever we find it, that
tenderness for the weakest fibres by which the hearts of our
fellow-creatures hold to their religious convictions, which will make the
transition from old belief to a larger light and liberty an interstitial
change and not a violent mutilation.

I remember once going into a little church in a small village some miles
from a great European capital.  The special object of adoration in this
humblest of places of worship was a bambino, a holy infant, done in wax,
and covered with cheap ornaments such as a little girl would like to
beautify her doll with.  Many a good Protestant of the old Puritan type
would have felt a strong impulse to seize this "idolatrous" figure and
dash it to pieces on the stone floor of the little church.  But one must
have lived awhile among simple-minded pious Catholics to know what this
poor waxen image and the whole baby-house of bambinos mean for a humble,
unlettered, unimaginative peasantry.  He will find that the true office
of this eidolon is to fix the mind of the worshipper, and that in virtue
of the devotional thoughts it has called forth so often for so many years
in the mind of that poor old woman who is kneeling before it, it is no
longer a wax doll for her, but has undergone a transubstantiation quite
as real as that of the Eucharist.  The moral is that we must not roughly
smash other people's idols because we know, or think we know, that they
are of cheap human manufacture.

--Do you think cheap manufactures encourage idleness?--said I.

The Master stared.  Well he might, for I had been getting a little
drowsy, and wishing to show that I had been awake and attentive, asked a
question suggested by some words I had caught, but which showed that I
had not been taking the slightest idea from what he was reading me.  He
stared, shook his head slowly, smiled good-humoredly, took off his great
round spectacles, and shut up his book.

--Sat prates biberunt,--he said.  A sick man that gets talking about
himself, a woman that gets talking about her baby, and an author that
begins reading out of his own book, never know when to stop.  You'll
think of some of these things you've been getting half asleep over by and
by.  I don't want you to believe anything I say; I only want you to try
to see what makes me believe it.

My young friend, the Astronomer, has, I suspect, been making some
addition to his manuscript.  At any rate some of the lines he read us in
the afternoon of this same day had never enjoyed the benefit of my
revision, and I think they had but just been written.  I noticed that his
manner was somewhat more excited than usual, and his voice just towards
the close a little tremulous.  Perhaps I may attribute his improvement to
the effect of my criticisms, but whatever the reason, I think these lines
are very nearly as correct as they would have been if I had looked them
over.

               WIND-CLOUDS AND STAR-DRIFTS.

                         VII

          What if a soul redeemed, a spirit that loved
          While yet on earth and was beloved in turn,
          And still remembered every look and tone
          Of that dear earthly sister who was left
          Among the unwise virgins at the gate,
          Itself admitted with the bridegroom's train,
          What if this spirit redeemed, amid the host
          Of chanting angels, in some transient lull
          Of the eternal anthem, heard the cry
          Of its lost darling, whom in evil hour
          Some wilder pulse of nature led astray
          And left an outcast in a world of fire,
          Condemned to be the sport of cruel fiends,
          Sleepless, unpitying, masters of the skill
          To wring the maddest ecstasies of pain
          From worn-out souls that only ask to die,
          Would it not long to leave the bliss of Heaven,
          Bearing a little water in its hand
          To moisten those poor lips that plead in vain
          With Him we call our Father?  Or is all
          So changed in such as taste celestial joy
          They hear unmoved the endless wail of woe,
          The daughter in the same dear tones that hushed
          Her cradled slumbers; she who once had held
          A babe upon her bosom from its voice
          Hoarse with its cry of anguish, yet the same?

          No! not in ages when the Dreadful Bird
          Stamped his huge footprints, and the Fearful Beast
          Strode with the flesh about those fossil bones
          We build to mimic life with pygmy hands,
          Not in those earliest days when men ran wild
          And gashed each other with their knives of stone,
          When their low foreheads bulged in ridgy brows
          And their flat hands were callous in the palm
          With walking in the fashion of their sires,
          Grope as they might to find a cruel god
          To work their will on such as human wrath
          Had wrought its worst to torture, and had left
          With rage unsated, white and stark and cold,
          Could hate have shaped a demon more malign
          Than him the dead men mummied in their creed
          And taught their trembling children to adore!
          Made in his image!  Sweet and gracious souls
          Dear to my heart by nature's fondest names,
          Is not your memory still the precious mould
          That lends its form to Him who hears my prayer?
          Thus only I behold him, like to them,
          Long-suffering, gentle, ever slow to wrath,
          If wrath it be that only wounds to heal,
          Ready to meet the wanderer ere he reach
          The door he seeks, forgetful of his sin,
          Longing to clasp him in a father's arms,
          And seal his pardon with a pitying tear!

          Four gospels tell their story to mankind,
          And none so full of soft, caressing words
          That bring the Maid of Bethlehem and her Babe
          Before our tear-dimmed eyes, as his who learned
          In the meek service of his gracious art
          The tones which like the medicinal balms
          That calm the sufferer's anguish, soothe our souls.
         --Oh that the loving woman, she who sat
          So long a listener at her Master's feet,
          Had left us Mary's Gospel,--all she heard
          Too sweet, too subtle for the ear of man!
          Mark how the tender-hearted mothers read
          The messages of love between the lines
          Of the same page that loads the bitter tongue
          Of him who deals in terror as his trade
          With threatening words of wrath that scorch like flame!
          They tell of angels whispering round the bed
          Of the sweet infant smiling in its dream,
          Of lambs enfolded in the Shepherd's arms,
          Of Him who blessed the children; of the land
          Where crystal rivers feed unfading flowers,
          Of cities golden-paved with streets of pearl,
          Of the white robes the winged creatures wear,
          The crowns and harps from whose melodious strings
          One long, sweet anthem flows forevermore!

         --We too bad human mothers, even as Thou,
          Whom we have learned to worship as remote
          From mortal kindred, wast a cradled babe.
          The milk of woman filled our branching veins,
          She lulled us with her tender nursery-song,
          And folded round us her untiring arms,
          While the first unremembered twilight year
          Shaped us to conscious being; still we feel
          Her pulses in our own,--too faintly feel;
          Would that the heart of woman warmed our creeds!

          Not from the sad-eyed hermit's lonely cell,
          Not from the conclave where the holy men
          Glare on each other, as with angry eyes
          They battle for God's glory and their own,
          Till, sick of wordy strife, a show of hands
          Fixes the faith of ages yet unborn,
          Ah, not from these the listening soul can hear
          The Father's voice that speaks itself divine!
          Love must be still our Master; till we learn
          What he can teach us of a woman's heart,
          We know not His, whose love embraces all.

There are certain nervous conditions peculiar to women in which the
common effects of poetry and of music upon their sensibilities are
strangely exaggerated.  It was not perhaps to be wondered at that Octavia
fainted when Virgil in reading from his great poem came to the line
beginning Tu Marcellus eris: It is not hard to believe the story told of
one of the two Davidson sisters, that the singing of some of Moore's
plaintive melodies would so impress her as almost to take away the
faculties of sense and motion.  But there must have been some special
cause for the singular nervous state into which this reading threw the
young girl, our Scheherezade.  She was doubtless tired with overwork and
troubled with the thought that she was not doing herself justice, and
that she was doomed to be the helpless prey of some of those corbies who
not only pick out corbies' eyes, but find no other diet so nutritious and
agreeable.

Whatever the cause may have been, her heart heaved tumultuously, her
color came and went, and though she managed to avoid a scene by the
exercise of all her self-control, I watched her very anxiously, for I was
afraid she would have had a hysteric turn, or in one of her pallid
moments that she would have fainted and fallen like one dead before us.

I was very glad, therefore, when evening came, to find that she was going
out for a lesson on the stars.  I knew the open air was what she needed,
and I thought the walk would do her good, whether she made any new
astronomical acquisitions or not.

It was now late in the autumn, and the trees were pretty nearly stripped
of their leaves.--There was no place so favorable as the Common for the
study of the heavens.  The skies were brilliant with stars, and the air
was just keen enough to remind our young friends that the cold season was
at hand.  They wandered round for a while, and at last found themselves
under the Great Elm, drawn thither, no doubt, by the magnetism it is so
well known to exert over the natives of its own soil and those who have
often been under the shadow of its outstretched arms.  The venerable
survivor of its contemporaries that flourished in the days when
Blackstone rode beneath it on his bull was now a good deal broken by age,
yet not without marks of lusty vitality.  It had been wrenched and
twisted and battered by so many scores of winters that some of its limbs
were crippled and many of its joints were shaky, and but for the support
of the iron braces that lent their strong sinews to its more infirm
members it would have gone to pieces in the first strenuous northeaster
or the first sudden and violent gale from the southwest.  But there it
stood, and there it stands as yet,--though its obituary was long ago
written after one of the terrible storms that tore its branches,--leafing
out hopefully in April as if it were trying in its dumb language to lisp
"Our Father," and dropping its slender burden of foliage in October as
softly as if it were whispering Amen!

Not far from the ancient and monumental tree lay a small sheet of water,
once agile with life and vocal with evening melodies, but now stirred
only by the swallow as he dips his wing, or by the morning bath of the
English sparrows, those high-headed, thick-bodied, full-feeding,
hot-tempered little John Bulls that keep up such a swashing and swabbing
and spattering round all the water basins, one might think from the fuss
they make about it that a bird never took a bath here before, and that
they were the missionaries of ablution to the unwashed Western world.

There are those who speak lightly of this small aqueous expanse, the eye
of the sacred enclosure, which has looked unwinking on the happy faces of
so many natives and the curious features of so many strangers.  The music
of its twilight minstrels has long ceased, but their memory lingers like
an echo in the name it bears.  Cherish it, inhabitants of the two-hilled
city, once three-hilled; ye who have said to the mountain, "Remove
hence," and turned the sea into dry land!  May no contractor fill his
pockets by undertaking to fill thee, thou granite girdled lakelet, or
drain the civic purse by drawing off thy waters!  For art thou not the
Palladium of our Troy? Didst thou not, like the Divine image which was
the safeguard of Ilium, fall from the skies, and if the Trojan could look
with pride upon the heaven-descended form of the Goddess of Wisdom,
cannot he who dwells by thy shining oval look in that mirror and
contemplate Himself,--the Native of Boston.

There must be some fatality which carries our young men and maidens in
the direction of the Common when they have anything very particular to
exchange their views about.  At any rate I remember two of our young
friends brought up here a good many years ago, and I understand that
there is one path across the enclosure which a young man must not ask a
young woman to take with him unless he means business, for an action will
hold--for breach of promise, if she consents to accompany him, and he
chooses to forget his obligations:

Our two young people stood at the western edge of the little pool,
studying astronomy in the reflected firmament.  The Pleiades were
trembling in the wave before them, and the three great stars of
Orion,--for these constellations were both glittering in the eastern sky.

"There is no place too humble for the glories of heaven to shine in," she
said.

"And their splendor makes even this little pool beautiful and noble," he
answered.  "Where is the light to come from that is to do as much for our
poor human lives?"

A simple question enough, but the young girl felt her color change as she
answered, "From friendship, I think."

--Grazing only as-yet,--not striking full, hardly hitting at all,--but
there are questions and answers that come so very near, the wind of them
alone almost takes the breath away.

There was an interval of silence.  Two young persons can stand looking at
water for a long time without feeling the necessity of speaking.
Especially when the water is alive with stars and the young persons are
thoughtful and impressible.  The water seems to do half the thinking
while one is looking at it; its movements are felt in the brain very much
like thought.  When I was in full training as a flaneur, I could stand on
the Pont Neuf with the other experts in the great science of passive
cerebration and look at the river for half an hour with so little mental
articulation that when I moved on it seemed as if my thinking-marrow had
been asleep and was just waking up refreshed after its nap.

So the reader can easily account for the interval of silence.  It is hard
to tell how long it would have lasted, but just then a lubberly intrusive
boy threw a great stone, which convulsed the firmament, the one at their
feet, I mean.  The six Pleiads disappeared as if in search of their lost
sister; the belt of Orion was broken asunder, and a hundred worlds
dissolved back into chaos.  They turned away and strayed off into one of
the more open paths, where the view of the sky over them was
unobstructed.  For some reason or other the astronomical lesson did not
get on very fast this evening.

Presently the young man asked his pupil:

--Do you know what the constellation directly over our heads is?

--Is it not Cassiopea?--she asked a little hesitatingly.

--No, it is Andromeda.  You ought not to have forgotten her, for I
remember showing you a double star, the one in her right foot, through
the equatorial telescope.  You have not forgotten the double star,--the
two that shone for each other and made a little world by themselves?

--No, indeed,--she answered, and blushed, and felt ashamed because she
had said indeed, as if it had been an emotional recollection.

The double-star allusion struck another dead silence.  She would have
given a week's pay to any invisible attendant that would have cut her
stay-lace.

At last: Do you know the story of Andromeda? he said.

--Perhaps I did once, but suppose I don't remember it.

He told her the story of the unfortunate maiden chained to a rock and
waiting for a sea-beast that was coming to devour her, and how Perseus
came and set her free, and won her love with her life.  And then he began
something about a young man chained to his rock, which was a star-gazer's
tower, a prey by turns to ambition, and lonely self-contempt and
unwholesome scorn of the life he looked down upon after the serenity of
the firmament, and endless questionings that led him nowhere,--and now he
had only one more question to ask.  He loved her.  Would she break his
chain?--He held both his hands out towards her, the palms together, as if
they were fettered at the wrists.  She took hold of them very gently;
parted them a little; then wider--wider--and found herself all at once
folded, unresisting, in her lover's arms.

So there was a new double-star in the living firmament.  The
constellations seemed to kindle with new splendors as the student and the
story-teller walked homeward in their light; Alioth and Algol looked down
on them as on the first pair of lovers they shone over, and the autumn
air seemed full of harmonies as when the morning stars sang together.




XII

The old Master had asked us, the Young Astronomer and myself, into his
library, to hear him read some passages from his interleaved book.  We
three had formed a kind of little club without knowing it from the time
when the young man began reading those extracts from his poetical
reveries which I have reproduced in these pages. Perhaps we agreed in too
many things,--I suppose if we could have had a good hard-headed,
old-fashioned New England divine to meet with us it might have acted as a
wholesome corrective.  For we had it all our own way; the Lady's kindly
remonstrance was taken in good part, but did not keep us from talking
pretty freely, and as for the Young Girl, she listened with the
tranquillity and fearlessness which a very simple trusting creed
naturally gives those who hold it.  The fewer outworks to the citadel of
belief, the fewer points there are to be threatened and endangered.

The reader must not suppose that I even attempt to reproduce everything
exactly as it took place in our conversations, or when we met to listen
to the Master's prose or to the Young Astronomer's verse.  I do not
pretend to give all the pauses and interruptions by question or
otherwise.  I could not always do it if I tried, but I do not want to,
for oftentimes it is better to let the speaker or reader go on
continuously, although there may have been many breaks in the course of
the conversation or reading.  When, for instance, I by and by reproduce
what the Landlady said to us, I shall give it almost without any hint
that it was arrested in its flow from time to time by various expressions
on the part of the hearers.

I can hardly say what the reason of it was, but it is very certain that I
had a vague sense of some impending event as we took our seats in the
Master's library.  He seemed particularly anxious that we should be
comfortably seated, and shook up the cushions of the arm-chairs himself,
and got them into the right places.

Now go to sleep--he said--or listen,--just which you like best.  But I am
going to begin by telling you both a secret.

Liberavi animam meam.  That is the meaning of my book and of my literary
life, if I may give such a name to that party-colored shred of human
existence.  I have unburdened myself in this book, and in some other
pages, of what I was born to say.  Many things that I have said in my
ripe days have been aching in my soul since I was a mere child.  I say
aching, because they conflicted with many of my inherited beliefs, or
rather traditions.  I did not know then that two strains of blood were
striving in me for the mastery,--two! twenty, perhaps,--twenty thousand,
for aught I know,--but represented to me by two,--paternal and maternal.
Blind forces in themselves; shaping thoughts as they shaped features and
battled for the moulding of constitution and the mingling of temperament.

Philosophy and poetry came--to me before I knew their names.

     Je fis mes premiers vers, sans savoir les ecrire.

Not verses so much as the stuff that verses are made of.  I don't suppose
that the thoughts which came up of themselves in my mind were so mighty
different from what come up in the minds of other young folks.  And that
's the best reason I could give for telling 'em.  I don't believe
anything I've written is as good as it seemed to me when I wrote it,--he
stopped, for he was afraid he was lying,--not much that I 've written, at
any rate,--he said--with a smile at the honesty which made him qualify
his statement.  But I do know this: I have struck a good many chords,
first and last, in the consciousness of other people.  I confess to a
tender feeling for my little brood of thoughts.  When they have been
welcomed and praised it has pleased me, and if at any time they have been
rudely handled and despitefully entreated it has cost me a little worry.
I don't despise reputation, and I should like to be remembered as having
said something worth lasting well enough to last.

But all that is nothing to the main comfort I feel as a writer.  I have
got rid of something my mind could not keep to itself and rise as it was
meant to into higher regions.  I saw the aeronauts the other day emptying
from the bags some of the sand that served as ballast.  It glistened a
moment in the sunlight as a slender shower, and then was lost and seen no
more as it scattered itself unnoticed. But the airship rose higher as the
sand was poured out, and so it seems to me I have felt myself getting
above the mists and clouds whenever I have lightened myself of some
portion of the mental ballast I have carried with me.  Why should I hope
or fear when I send out my book?  I have had my reward, for I have
wrought out my thought, I have said my say, I have freed my soul.  I can
afford to be forgotten.

Look here!--he said.  I keep oblivion always before me.---He pointed to a
singularly perfect and beautiful trilobite which was lying on a pile of
manuscripts.---Each time I fill a sheet of paper with what I am writing,
I lay it beneath this relic of a dead world, and project my thought
forward into eternity as far as this extinct crustacean carries it
backward.  When my heart beats too lustily with vain hopes of being
remembered, I press the cold fossil against it and it grows calm.  I
touch my forehead with it, and its anxious furrows grow smooth.  Our
world, too, with all its breathing life, is but a leaf to be folded with
the other strata, and if I am only patient, by and by I shall be just as
famous as imperious Caesar himself, embedded with me in a conglomerate.

He began reading:--"There is no new thing under the sun," said the
Preacher.  He would not say so now, if he should come to life for a
little while, and have his photograph taken, and go up in a balloon, and
take a trip by railroad and a voyage by steamship, and get a message from
General Grant by the cable, and see a man's leg cut off without its
hurting him.  If it did not take his breath away and lay him out as flat
as the Queen of Sheba was knocked over by the splendors of his court, he
must have rivalled our Indians in the nil admarari line.

For all that, it is a strange thing to see what numbers of new things are
really old.  There are many modern contrivances that are of as early date
as the first man, if not thousands of centuries older. Everybody knows
how all the arrangements of our telescopes and microscopes are
anticipated in the eye, and how our best musical instruments are
surpassed by the larynx.  But there are some very odd things any
anatomist can tell, showing how our recent contrivances are anticipated
in the human body.  In the alimentary canal are certain pointed eminences
called villi, and certain ridges called valvuloe conniventes.  The makers
of heating apparatus have exactly reproduced the first in the "pot" of
their furnaces, and the second in many of the radiators to be seen in our
public buildings.  The object in the body and the heating apparatus is
the same; to increase the extent of surface.--We mix hair with plaster
(as the Egyptians mixed straw with clay to make bricks) so that it shall
hold more firmly.  But before man had any artificial dwelling the same
contrivance of mixing fibrous threads with a cohesive substance had been
employed in the jointed fabric of his own spinal column.  India-rubber is
modern, but the yellow animal substance which is elastic like that, and
serves the same purpose in the animal economy which that serves in our
mechanical contrivances, is as old as the mammalia.  The dome, the round
and the Gothic arch, the groined roof, the flying buttress, are all
familiar to those who have studied the bony frame of man.  All forms of
the lever and all the principal kinds of hinges are to be met with in our
own frames.  The valvular arrangements of the blood-vessels are
unapproached by any artificial apparatus, and the arrangements for
preventing friction are so perfect that two surfaces will play on each
other for fourscore years or more and never once trouble their owner by
catching or rubbing so as to be felt or heard.

But stranger than these repetitions are the coincidences one finds in the
manners and speech of antiquity and our own time.  In the days when Flood
Ireson was drawn in the cart by the Maenads of Marblehead, that fishing
town had the name of nurturing a young population not over fond of
strangers.  It used to be said that if an unknown landsman showed himself
in the streets, the boys would follow after him, crying, "Rock him!  Rock
him!  He's got a long-tailed coat on!"

Now if one opens the Odyssey, he will find that the Phaeacians, three
thousand years ago, were wonderfully like these youthful Marbleheaders.
The blue-eyed Goddess who convoys Ulysses, under the disguise of a young
maiden of the place, gives him some excellent advice.  "Hold your
tongue," she says, "and don't look at anybody or ask any questions, for
these are seafaring people, and don't like to have strangers round or
anybody that does not belong here."

Who would have thought that the saucy question, "Does your mother know
you're out?" was the very same that Horace addressed to the bore who
attacked him in the Via Sacra?

     Interpellandi locus hic erat; Est tibi mater?
     Cognati, queis te salvo est opus?

And think of the London cockney's prefix of the letter h to innocent
words beginning with a vowel having its prototype in the speech of the
vulgar Roman, as may be seen in the verses of Catullus:

     Chommoda dicebat, siquando commoda vellet
     Dicere, et hinsidias Arrius insidias.
     Et tum mirifice sperabat se esse locutum,
     Cum quantum poterat, dixerat hinsidias...

     Hoc misso in Syriam, requierant omnibus aures...
     Cum subito affertur nuncius horribilis;
     Ionios fluctus, postquam illue Arrius isset,
     Jam non Ionios esse, sed Hionios.

--Our neighbors of Manhattan have an excellent jest about our crooked
streets which, if they were a little more familiar with a native author
of unquestionable veracity, they would strike out from the letter of "Our
Boston Correspondent," where it is a source of perennial hilarity.  It is
worth while to reprint, for the benefit of whom it may concern, a
paragraph from the authentic history of the venerable Diedrich
Knickerbocker:

"The sage council, as has been mentioned in a preceding chapter, not
being able to determine upon any plan for the building of their
city,--the cows, in a laudable fit of patriotism, took it under their
peculiar charge, and as they went to and from pasture, established paths
through the bushes, on each side of which the good folks built their
houses; which is one cause of the rambling and picturesque turns and
labyrinths, which distinguish certain streets of New York at this very
day."

--When I was a little boy there came to stay with us for a while a young
lady with a singularly white complexion.  Now I had often seen the masons
slacking lime, and I thought it was the whitest thing I had ever looked
upon.  So I always called this fair visitor of ours Slacked Lime.  I
think she is still living in a neighboring State, and I am sure she has
never forgotten the fanciful name I gave her. But within ten or a dozen
years I have seen this very same comparison going the round of the
papers, and credited to a Welsh poet, David Ap Gwyllym, or something like
that, by name.

--I turned a pretty sentence enough in one of my lectures about finding
poppies springing up amidst the corn; as if it had been foreseen by
nature that wherever there should be hunger that asked for food, there
would be pain that needed relief,--and many years afterwards.  I had the
pleasure of finding that Mistress Piozzi had been beforehand with me in
suggesting the same moral reflection.

--I should like to carry some of my friends to see a giant bee-hive I
have discovered.  Its hum can be heard half a mile, and the great white
swarm counts its tens of thousands.  They pretend to call it a
planing-mill, but if it is not a bee-hive it is so like one that if a
hundred people have not said so before me, it is very singular that they
have not.  If I wrote verses I would try to bring it in, and I suppose
people would start up in a dozen places, and say, "Oh, that bee-hive
simile is mine,--and besides, did not Mr. Bayard Taylor call the
snowflakes 'white bees'?"

I think the old Master had chosen these trivialities on purpose to amuse
the Young Astronomer and myself, if possible, and so make sure of our
keeping awake while he went on reading, as follows:

--How the sweet souls of all time strike the same note, the same because
it is in unison with the divine voice that sings to them!  I read in the
Zend Avesta, "No earthly man with a hundred-fold strength speaks so much
evil as Mithra with heavenly strength speaks good.  No earthly man with a
hundred-fold strength does so much evil as Mithra with heavenly strength
does good."

And now leave Persia and Zoroaster, and come down with me to our own New
England and one of our old Puritan preachers.  It was in the dreadful
days of the Salem Witchcraft delusion that one Jonathan Singletary, being
then in the prison at Ipswich, gave his testimony as to certain fearful
occurrences,--a great noise, as of many cats climbing, skipping, and
jumping, of throwing about of furniture, and of men walking in the
chambers, with crackling and shaking as if the house would fall upon him.

"I was at present," he says, "something affrighted; yet considering what
I had lately heard made out by Mr. Mitchel at Cambridge, that there is
more good in God than there is evil in sin, and that although God is the
greatest good and sin the greatest evil, yet the first Being of evil
cannot weave the scales or overpower the first Being of good: so
considering that the authour of good was of greater power than the
authour of evil, God was pleased of his goodness to keep me from being
out of measure frighted."

I shall always bless the memory of this poor, timid creature for saving
that dear remembrance of "Matchless Mitchel."  How many, like him, have
thought they were preaching a new gospel, when they were only reaffirming
the principles which underlie the Magna Charta of humanity, and are
common to the noblest utterances of all the nobler creeds!  But spoken by
those solemn lips to those stern, simpleminded hearers, the words I have
cited seem to me to have a fragrance like the precious ointment of
spikenard with which Mary anointed her Master's feet.  I can see the
little bare meeting-house, with the godly deacons, and the grave matrons,
and the comely maidens, and the sober manhood of the village, with the
small group of college students sitting by themselves under the shadow of
the awful Presidential Presence, all listening to that preaching, which
was, as Cotton Mather says, "as a very lovely song of one that hath a
pleasant voice"; and as the holy pastor utters those blessed words, which
are not of any one church or age, but of all time, the humble place of
worship is filled with their perfume, as the house where Mary knelt was
filled with the odor of the precious ointment.

--The Master rose, as he finished reading this sentence, and, walking to
the window, adjusted a curtain which he seemed to find a good deal of
trouble in getting to hang just as he wanted it.

He came back to his arm-chair, and began reading again

--If men would only open their eyes to the fact which stares them in the
face from history, and is made clear enough by the slightest glance at
the condition of mankind, that humanity is of immeasurably greater
importance than their own or any other particular belief, they would no
more attempt to make private property of the grace of God than to fence
in the sunshine for their own special use and enjoyment.

We are all tattoed in our cradles with the beliefs of our tribe; the
record may seem superficial, but it is indelible.  You cannot educate a
man wholly out of the superstitious fears which were early implanted in
his imagination; no matter how utterly his reason may reject them, he
will still feel as the famous woman did about ghosts, Je n'y crois pas,
mais je les crains,--"I don't believe in them, but I am afraid of them,
nevertheless."

--As people grow older they come at length to live so much in memory that
they often think with a kind of pleasure of losing their dearest
blessings.  Nothing can be so perfect while we possess it as it will seem
when remembered.  The friend we love best may sometimes weary us by his
presence or vex us by his infirmities.  How sweet to think of him as he
will be to us after we have outlived him ten or a dozen years!  Then we
can recall him in his best moments, bid him stay with us as long as we
want his company, and send him away when we wish to be alone again.  One
might alter Shenstone's well-known epitaph to suit such a case:--

     Hen! quanto minus est cum to vivo versari

     Quam erit (vel esset) tui mortui reminisse!

    "Alas! how much less the delight of thy living presence
     Than will (or would) be that of remembering thee when thou hast
     left us!"

I want to stop here--I the Poet--and put in a few reflections of my own,
suggested by what I have been giving the reader from the Master's Book,
and in a similar vein.

--How few things there are that do not change their whole aspect in the
course of a single generation!  The landscape around us is wholly
different.  Even the outlines of the hills that surround us are changed
by the creeping of the villages with their spires and school-houses up
their sides.  The sky remains the same, and the ocean.  A few old
churchyards look very much as they used to, except, of course, in Boston,
where the gravestones have been rooted up and planted in rows with walks
between them, to the utter disgrace and ruin of our most venerated
cemeteries.  The Registry of Deeds and the Probate Office show us the
same old folios, where we can read our grandfather's title to his estate
(if we had a grandfather and he happened to own anything) and see how
many pots and kettles there were in his kitchen by the inventory of his
personal property.

Among living people none remain so long unchanged as the actors.  I can
see the same Othello to-day, if I choose, that when I was a boy I saw
smothering Mrs. Duff-Desdemona with the pillow, under the instigations of
Mr. Cooper-Iago.  A few stone heavier than he was then, no doubt, but the
same truculent blackamoor that took by the thr-r-r-oat the circumcised
dog in Aleppo, and told us about it in the old Boston Theatre.  In the
course of a fortnight, if I care to cross the water, I can see
Mademoiselle Dejazet in the same parts I saw her in under Louis Philippe,
and be charmed by the same grace and vivacity which delighted my
grandmother (if she was in Paris, and went to see her in the part of
Fanchon toute seule at the Theatre des Capucines) in the days when the
great Napoleon was still only First Consul.

The graveyard and the stage are pretty much the only places where you can
expect to find your friends--as you left them, five and twenty or fifty
years ago.  I have noticed, I may add, that old theatre-goers bring back
the past with their stories more vividly than men with any other
experiences.  There were two old New-Yorkers that I used to love to sit
talking with about the stage.  One was a scholar and a writer of note; a
pleasant old gentleman, with the fresh cheek of an octogenarian Cupid.
The other not less noted in his way, deep in local lore, large-brained,
full-blooded, of somewhat perturbing and tumultuous presence.  It was
good to hear them talk of George Frederic Cooke, of Kean, and the lesser
stars of those earlier constellations.  Better still to breakfast with
old Samuel Rogers, as some of my readers have done more than once, and
hear him answer to the question who was the best actor he remembered, "I
think, on the whole, Garrick."

If we did but know how to question these charming old people before it is
too late!  About ten years, more or less, after the generation in advance
of our own has all died off, it occurs to us all at once, "There!  I can
ask my old friend what he knows of that picture, which must be a Copley;
of that house and its legends about which there is such a mystery.  He
(or she) must know all about that."  Too late! Too late!

Still, now and then one saves a reminiscence that means a good deal by
means of a casual question.  I asked the first of those two old
New-Yorkers the following question: "Who, on the whole, seemed to you the
most considerable person you ever met?"

Now it must be remembered that this was a man who had lived in a city
that calls itself the metropolis, one who had been a member of the State
and the National Legislature, who had come in contact with men of
letters and men of business, with politicians and members of all the
professions, during a long and distinguished public career.  I paused for
his answer with no little curiosity.  Would it be one of the great
Ex-Presidents whose names were known to, all the world? Would it be the
silver-tongued orator of Kentucky or the "God-like" champion of the
Constitution, our New-England Jupiter Capitolinus? Who would it be?

"Take it altogether," he answered, very deliberately, "I should say
Colonel Elisha Williams was the most notable personage that I have met
with."

--Colonel Elisha Williams!  And who might he be, forsooth?  A gentleman
of singular distinction, you may be well assured, even though you are not
familiar with his name; but as I am not writing a biographical
dictionary, I shall leave it to my reader to find out who and what he
was.

--One would like to live long enough to witness certain things which will
no doubt come to pass by and by.  I remember that when one of our good
kindhearted old millionnaires was growing very infirm, his limbs failing
him, and his trunk getting packed with the infirmities which mean that
one is bound on a long journey, he said very simply and sweetly, "I don't
care about living a great deal longer, but I should like to live long
enough to find out how much old (a many-millioned fellow-citizen) is
worth."  And without committing myself on the longevity-question, I
confess I should like to live long enough to see a few things happen that
are like to come, sooner or later.

I want to hold the skull of Abraham in my hand.  They will go through the
cave of Machpelah at Hebron, I feel sure, in the course of a few
generations at the furthest, and as Dr. Robinson knows of nothing which
should lead us to question the correctness of the tradition which regards
this as the place of sepulture of Abraham and the other patriarchs, there
is no reason why we may not find his mummied body in perfect
preservation, if he was embalmed after the Egyptian fashion.  I suppose
the tomb of David will be explored by a commission in due time, and I
should like to see the phrenological developments of that great king and
divine singer and warm-blooded man.  If, as seems probable, the
anthropological section of society manages to get round the curse that
protects the bones of Shakespeare, I should like to see the dome which
rounded itself over his imperial brain.  Not that I am what is called a
phrenologist, but I am curious as to the physical developments of these
fellow-mortals of mine, and a little in want of a sensation.

I should like to live long enough to see the course of the Tiber turned,
and the bottom of the river thoroughly dredged.  I wonder if they would
find the seven-branched golden candlestick brought from Jerusalem by
Titus, and said to have been dropped from the Milvian bridge.  I have
often thought of going fishing for it some year when I wanted a vacation,
as some of my friends used to go to Ireland to fish for salmon.  There
was an attempt of that kind, I think, a few years ago.

We all know how it looks well enough, from the figure of it on the Arch
of Titus, but I should like to "heft" it in my own hand, and carry it
home and shine it up (excuse my colloquialisms), and sit down and look at
it, and think and think and think until the Temple of Solomon built up
its walls of hewn stone and its roofs of cedar around me as noiselessly
as when it rose, and "there was neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of
iron heard in the house while it was in building."

All this, you will remember, Beloved, is a digression on my own account,
and I return to the old Master whom I left smiling at his own alteration
of Shenstone's celebrated inscription.  He now begin reading again:

--I want it to be understood that I consider that a certain number of
persons are at liberty to dislike me peremptorily, without showing cause,
and that they give no offence whatever in so doing.

If I did not cheerfully acquiesce in this sentiment towards myself on the
part of others, I should not feel at liberty to indulge my own aversions.
I try to cultivate a Christian feeling to all my fellow-creatures, but
inasmuch as I must also respect truth and honesty, I confess to myself a
certain number of inalienable dislikes and prejudices, some of which may
possibly be shared by others.  Some of these are purely instinctive, for
others I can assign a reason.  Our likes and dislikes play so important a
part in the Order of Things that it is well to see on what they are
founded.

There are persons I meet occasionally who are too intelligent by half for
my liking.  They know my thoughts beforehand, and tell me what I was
going to say.  Of course they are masters of all my knowledge, and a good
deal besides; have read all the books I have read, and in later editions;
have had all the experiences I have been through, and more-too.  In my
private opinion every mother's son of them will lie at any time rather
than confess ignorance.

--I have a kind of dread, rather than hatred, of persons with a large
excess of vitality; great feeders, great laughers, great story-tellers,
who come sweeping over their company with a huge tidal wave of animal
spirits and boisterous merriment.  I have pretty good spirits myself, and
enjoy a little mild pleasantry, but I am oppressed and extinguished by
these great lusty, noisy creatures,--and feel as if I were a mute at a
funeral when they get into full blast.

--I cannot get along much better with those drooping, languid people,
whose vitality falls short as much as that of the others is in excess.  I
have not life enough for two; I wish I had.  It is not very enlivening to
meet a fellow-creature whose expression and accents say, "You are the
hair that breaks the camel's back of my endurance, you are the last drop
that makes my cup of woe run over"; persons whose heads drop on one side
like those of toothless infants, whose voices recall the tones in which
our old snuffling choir used to wail out the verses of:

     "Life is the time to serve the Lord."

--There is another style which does not captivate me.  I recognize an
attempt at the grand manner now and then, in persons who are well enough
in their way, but of no particular importance, socially or otherwise.
Some family tradition of wealth or distinction is apt to be at the bottom
of it, and it survives all the advantages that used to set it off.  I
like family pride as well as my neighbors, and respect the high-born
fellow-citizen whose progenitors have not worked in their shirt-sleeves
for the last two generations full as much as I ought to.  But grand pere
oblige; a person with a known grandfather is too distinguished to find it
necessary to put on airs. The few Royal Princes I have happened to know
were very easy people to get along with, and had not half the social
knee-action I have often seen in the collapsed dowagers who lifted their
eyebrows at me in my earlier years.

--My heart does not warm as it should do towards the persons, not
intimates, who are always too glad to see me when we meet by accident,
and discover all at once that they have a vast deal to unbosom themselves
of to me.

--There is one blameless person whom I cannot love and have no excuse for
hating.  It is the innocent fellow-creature, otherwise inoffensive to me,
whom I find I have involuntarily joined on turning a corner.  I suppose
the Mississippi, which was flowing quietly along, minding its own
business, hates the Missouri for coming into it all at once with its
muddy stream.  I suppose the Missouri in like manner hates the
Mississippi for diluting with its limpid, but insipid current the rich
reminiscences of the varied soils through which its own stream has
wandered.  I will not compare myself, to the clear or the turbid current,
but I will own that my heart sinks when I find all of a sudden I am in
for a corner confluence, and I cease loving my neighbor as myself until I
can get away from him.

--These antipathies are at least weaknesses; they may be sins in the eye
of the Recording Angel.  I often reproach myself with my wrong-doings.  I
should like sometimes to thank Heaven for saving me from some kinds of
transgression, and even for granting me some qualities that if I dared I
should be disposed to call virtues.  I should do so, I suppose, if I did
not remember the story of the Pharisee.  That ought not to hinder me.
The parable was told to illustrate a single virtue, humility, and the
most unwarranted inferences have been drawn from it as to the whole
character of the two parties.  It seems not at all unlikely, but rather
probable, that the Pharisee was a fairer dealer, a better husband, and a
more charitable person than the Publican, whose name has come down to us
"linked with one virtue," but who may have been guilty, for aught that
appears to the contrary, of "a thousand crimes."  Remember how we limit
the application of other parables.  The lord, it will be recollected,
commended the unjust steward because he had done wisely.  His shrewdness
was held up as an example, but after all he was a miserable swindler, and
deserved the state-prison as much as many of our financial operators. The
parable of the Pharisee and the Publican is a perpetual warning against
spiritual pride.  But it must not frighten any one of us out of being
thankful that he is not, like this or that neighbor, under bondage to
strong drink or opium, that he is not an Erie-Railroad Manager, and that
his head rests in virtuous calm on his own pillow. If he prays in the
morning to be kept out of temptation as well as for his daily bread,
shall he not return thanks at night that he has not fallen into sin as
well as that his stomach has been filled?  I do not think the poor
Pharisee has ever had fair play, and I am afraid a good many people sin
with the comforting, half-latent intention of smiting their breasts
afterwards and repeating the prayer of the Publican.

          (Sensation.)

This little movement which I have thus indicated seemed to give the
Master new confidence in his audience.  He turned over several pages
until he came to a part of the interleaved volume where we could all see
he had written in a passage of new matter in red ink as of special
interest.

--I told you, he said, in Latin, and I repeat it in English, that I have
freed my soul in these pages,--I have spoken my mind.  I have read you a
few extracts, most of them of rather slight texture, and some of them,
you perhaps thought, whimsical.  But I meant, if I thought you were in
the right mood for listening to it, to read you some paragraphs which
give in small compass the pith, the marrow, of all that my experience has
taught me.  Life is a fatal complaint, and an eminently contagious one.
I took it early, as we all do, and have treated it all along with the
best palliatives I could get hold of, inasmuch as I could find no radical
cure for its evils, and have so far managed to keep pretty comfortable
under it.

It is a great thing for a man to put the whole meaning of his life into a
few paragraphs, if he does it so that others can make anything out of it.
If he conveys his wisdom after the fashion of the old alchemists, he may
as well let it alone.  He must talk in very plain words, and that is what
I have done.  You want to know what a certain number of scores of years
have taught me that I think best worth telling.  If I had half a dozen
square inches of paper, and one penful of ink, and five minutes to use
them in for the instruction of those who come after me, what should I put
down in writing?  That is the question.

Perhaps I should be wiser if I refused to attempt any such brief
statement of the most valuable lesson that life has taught me.  I am by
no means sure that I had not better draw my pen through the page that
holds the quintessence of my vital experiences, and leave those who wish
to know what it is to distil to themselves from my many printed pages.
But I have excited your curiosity, and I see that you are impatient to
hear what the wisdom, or the folly, it may be, of a life shows for, when
it is crowded into a few lines as the fragrance of a gardenful of roses
is concentrated in a few drops of perfume.

--By this time I confess I was myself a little excited.  What was he
going to tell us?  The Young Astronomer looked upon him with an eye as
clear and steady and brilliant as the evening star, but I could see that
he too was a little nervous, wondering what would come next.

The old Master adjusted his large round spectacles, and began:

--It has cost me fifty years to find my place in the Order of Things. I
had explored all the sciences; I had studied the literature of all ages;
I had travelled in many lands; I had learned how to follow the working of
thought in men and of sentiment and instinct in women.  I had examined
for myself all the religions that could make out any claim for
themselves.  I had fasted and prayed with the monks of a lonely convent;
I had mingled with the crowds that shouted glory at camp-meetings; I had
listened to the threats of Calvinists and the promises of Universalists;
I had been a devout attendant on a Jewish Synagogue; I was in
correspondence with an intelligent Buddhist; and I met frequently with
the inner circle of Rationalists, who believed in the persistence of
Force, and the identity of alimentary substances with virtue, and were
reconstructing the universe on this basis, with absolute exclusion of all
Supernumeraries.  In these pursuits I had passed the larger part of my
half-century of existence, as yet with little satisfaction.  It was on
the morning of my fiftieth birthday that the solution of the great
problem I had sought so long came to me as a simple formula, with a few
grand but obvious inferences.  I will repeat the substance of this final
intuition:

The one central fact an the Order of Things which solves all questions
is:

At this moment we were interrupted by a knock at the Master's door. It
was most inopportune, for he was on the point of the great disclosure,
but common politeness compelled him to answer it, and as the step which
we had heard was that of one of the softer-footed sex, he chose to rise
from his chair and admit his visitor.

This visitor was our Landlady.  She was dressed with more than usual
nicety, and her countenance showed clearly that she came charged with an
important communication.

--I did n't low there was company with you, said the Landlady,--but it's
jest as well.  I've got something to tell my boarders that I don't want
to tell them, and if I must do it, I may as well tell you all at once as
one to a time.  I 'm agoing to give up keeping boarders at the end of
this year,--I mean come the end of December.

She took out a white handkerchief, at hand in expectation of what was to
happen, and pressed it to her eyes.  There was an interval of silence.
The Master closed his book and laid it on the table.  The Young
Astronomer did not look as much surprised as I should have expected.  I
was completely taken aback,--I had not thought of such a sudden breaking
up of our little circle.

When the Landlady had recovered her composure, she began again:

The Lady that's been so long with me is going to a house of her own,
--one she has bought back again, for it used to belong to her folks. It's
a beautiful house, and the sun shines in at the front windows all day
long.  She's going to be wealthy again, but it doos n't make any
difference in her ways.  I've had boarders complain when I was doing as
well as I knowed how for them, but I never heerd a word from her that
wasn't as pleasant as if she'd been talking to the Governor's lady.  I've
knowed what it was to have women-boarders that find fault,--there's some
of 'em would quarrel with me and everybody at my table; they would
quarrel with the Angel Gabriel if he lived in the house with 'em, and
scold at him and tell him he was always dropping his feathers round, if
they could n't find anything else to bring up against him.

Two other boarders of mine has given me notice that they was expecting to
leave come the first of January.  I could fill up their places easy
enough, for ever since that first book was wrote that called people's
attention to my boarding-house, I've had more wanting to come than I
wanted to keep.

But I'm getting along in life, and I ain't quite so rugged as I used to
be.  My daughter is well settled and my son is making his own living.
I've done a good deal of hard work in my time, and I feel as if I had a
right to a little rest.  There's nobody knows what a woman that has the
charge of a family goes through, but God Almighty that made her.  I've
done my best for them that I loved, and for them that was under my roof.
My husband and my children was well cared for when they lived, and he and
them little ones that I buried has white marble head-stones and
foot-stones, and an iron fence round the lot, and a place left for me
betwixt him and the....

Some has always been good to me,--some has made it a little of a strain
to me to get along.  When a woman's back aches with overworking herself
to keep her house in shape, and a dozen mouths are opening at her three
times a day, like them little young birds that split their heads open so
you can a'most see into their empty stomachs, and one wants this and
another wants that, and provisions is dear and rent is high, and nobody
to look to,--then a sharp word cuts, I tell you, and a hard look goes
right to your heart.  I've seen a boarder make a face at what I set
before him, when I had tried to suit him jest as well as I knew how, and
I haven't cared to eat a thing myself all the rest of that day, and I've
laid awake without a wink of sleep all night.  And then when you come
down the next morning all the boarders stare at you and wonder what makes
you so low-spirited, and why you don't look as happy and talk as cheerful
as one of them rich ladies that has dinner-parties, where they've nothing
to do but give a few orders, and somebody comes and cooks their dinner,
and somebody else comes and puts flowers on the table, and a lot of men
dressed up like ministers come and wait on everybody, as attentive as
undertakers at a funeral.

And that reminds me to tell you that I'm agoing to live with my daughter.
Her husband's a very nice man, and when he isn't following a corpse, he's
as good company as if he was a member of the city council.  My son, he's
agoing into business with the old Doctor he studied with, and he's agoing
to board with me at my daughter's for a while,--I suppose he'll be
getting a wife before long.  [This with a pointed look at our young
friend, the Astronomer.]

It is n't but a little while longer that we are going to be together, and
I want to say to you gentlemen, as I mean to say to the others and as I
have said to our two ladies, that I feel more obligated to, you for the
way you 've treated me than I know very well how to put into words.
Boarders sometimes expect too much of the ladies that provides for them.
Some days the meals are better than other days; it can't help being so.
Sometimes the provision-market is n't well supplied, sometimes the fire
in the cooking-stove does n't burn so well as it does other days;
sometimes the cook is n't so lucky as she might be.  And there is
boarders who is always laying in wait for the days when the meals is not
quite so good as they commonly be, to pick a quarrel with the one that is
trying to serve them so as that they shall be satisfied.  But you've all
been good and kind to me.  I suppose I'm not quite so spry and
quick-sighted as I was a dozen years ago, when my boarder wrote that
first book so many have asked me about.  But--now I'm going to stop
taking boarders.  I don't believe you'll think much about what I did n't
do,--because I couldn't,--but remember that at any rate I tried honestly
to serve you.  I hope God will bless all that set at my table, old and
young, rich and poor, merried and single, and single that hopes soon to
be merried.  My husband that's dead and gone always believed that we all
get to heaven sooner or later,--and sence I've grown older and buried so
many that I've loved I've come to feel that perhaps I should meet all of
them that I've known here--or at least as many of 'em as I wanted to--in
a better world.  And though I don't calculate there is any
boarding-houses in heaven, I hope I shall some time or other meet them
that has set round my table one year after another, all together, where
there is no fault-finding with the food and no occasion for it,--and if I
do meet them and you there--or anywhere,--if there is anything I can do
for you....

....Poor dear soul!  Her ideas had got a little mixed, and her heart was
overflowing, and the white handkerchief closed the scene with its timely
and greatly needed service.

--What a pity, I have often thought, that she came in just at that
precise moment!  For the old Master was on the point of telling us, and
through one of us the reading world,--I mean that fraction of it which
has reached this point of the record,--at any rate, of telling you,
Beloved, through my pen, his solution of a great problem we all have to
deal with.  We were some weeks longer together, but he never offered to
continue his reading.  At length I ventured to give him a hint that our
young friend and myself would both of us be greatly gratified if he would
begin reading from his unpublished page where he had left off.

--No, sir,--he said,--better not, better not.  That which means so much
to me, the writer, might be a disappointment, or at least a puzzle, to
you, the listener.  Besides, if you'll take my printed book and be at the
trouble of thinking over what it says, and put that with what you've
heard me say, and then make those comments and reflections which will be
suggested to a mind in so many respects like mine as is your own,--excuse
my good opinion of myself,

(It is a high compliment to me, I replied) you will perhaps find you have
the elements of the formula and its consequences which I was about to
read you.  It's quite as well to crack your own filberts as to borrow the
use of other people's teeth.  I think we will wait awhile before we pour
out the Elixir Vitae.

--To tell the honest truth, I suspect the Master has found out that his
formula does not hold water quite so perfectly as he was thinking, so
long as he kept it to himself, and never thought of imparting it to
anybody else.  The very minute a thought is threatened with publicity it
seems to shrink towards mediocrity, as. I have noticed that a great
pumpkin, the wonder of a village, seemed to lose at least a third of its
dimensions between the field where it grew and the cattle-show
fair-table, where it took its place with other enormous pumpkins from
other wondering villages.  But however that maybe, I shall always regret
that I had not the opportunity of judging for myself how completely the
Master's formula, which, for him, at least, seemed to have solved the
great problem, would have accomplished that desirable end for me.

The Landlady's announcement of her intention to give up keeping boarders
was heard with regret by all who met around her table.  The Member of the
Haouse inquired of me whether I could tell him if the Lamb Tahvern was
kept well abaout these times.  He knew that members from his place used
to stop there, but he hadn't heerd much abaout it of late years.  I had
to inform him that that fold of rural innocence had long ceased offering
its hospitalities to the legislative, flock. He found refuge at last, I
have learned, in a great public house in the northern section of the
city, where, as he said, the folks all went up stairs in a rat-trap, and
the last I heard of him was looking out of his somewhat elevated
attic-window in a northwesterly direction in hopes that he might perhaps
get a sight of the Grand Monadnock, a mountain in New Hampshire which I
have myself seen from the top of Bunker Hill Monument.

The Member of the Haouse seems to have been more in a hurry to find a new
resting-place than the other boarders.  By the first of January, however,
our whole company was scattered, never to meet again around the board
where we had been so long together.

The Lady moved to the house where she had passed many of her prosperous
years.  It had been occupied by a rich family who had taken it nearly as
it stood, and as the pictures had been dusted regularly, and the books
had never been handled, she found everything in many respects as she had
left it, and in some points improved, for the rich people did not know
what else to do, and so they spent money without stint on their house and
its adornments, by all of which she could not help profiting.  I do not
choose to give the street and number of the house where she lives, but
a-great many poor people know very well where it is, and as a matter of
course the rich ones roll up to her door in their carriages by the dozen
every fine Monday while anybody is in town.

It is whispered that our two young folks are to be married before another
season, and that the Lady has asked them to come and stay with her for a
while.  Our Scheherezade is to write no more stories. It is astonishing
to see what a change for the better in her aspect a few weeks of
brain-rest and heart's ease have wrought in her.  I doubt very much
whether she ever returns to literary labor.  The work itself was almost
heart-breaking, but the effect upon her of the sneers and cynical
insolences of the literary rough who came at her in mask and brass
knuckles was to give her what I fear will be a lifelong disgust against
any writing for the public, especially in any of the periodicals.  I am
not sorry that she should stop writing, but I am sorry that she should
have been silenced in such a rude way. I doubt, too, whether the Young
Astronomer will pass the rest of his life in hunting for comets and
planets.  I think he has found an attraction that will call him down from
the celestial luminaries to a light not less pure and far less remote.
And I am inclined to believe that the best answer to many of those
questions which have haunted him and found expression in his verse will
be reached by a very different channel from that of lonely contemplation,
the duties, the cares, the responsible realities of a life drawn out of
itself by the power of newly awakened instincts and affections.  The
double star was prophetic,--I thought it would be.

The Register of Deeds is understood to have been very handsomely treated
by the boarder who owes her good fortune to his sagacity and activity.
He has engaged apartments at a very genteel boarding-house not far from
the one where we have all been living.  The Salesman found it a simple
matter to transfer himself to an establishment over the way; he had very
little to move, and required very small accommodations.

The Capitalist, however, seems to have felt it impossible to move without
ridding himself of a part at--least of his encumbrances.  The community
was startled by the announcement that a citizen who did not wish his name
to be known had made a free gift of a large sum of money--it was in tens
of thousands--to an institution of long standing and high character in
the city of which he was a quiet resident.  The source of such a gift
could not long be kept secret. It, was our economical, not to say
parsimonious Capitalist who had done this noble act, and the poor man had
to skulk through back streets and keep out of sight, as if he were a show
character in a travelling caravan, to avoid the acknowledgments of his
liberality, which met him on every hand and put him fairly out of
countenance.

That Boy has gone, in virtue of a special invitation, to make a visit of
indefinite length at the house of the father of the older boy, whom we
know by the name of Johnny.  Of course he is having a good time, for
Johnny's father is full of fun, and tells first-rate stories, and if
neither of the boys gets his brains kicked out by the pony, or blows
himself up with gunpowder, or breaks through the ice and gets drowned,
they will have a fine time of it this winter.

The Scarabee could not bear to remove his collections, and the old Master
was equally unwilling to disturb his books.  It was arranged, therefore,
that they should keep their apartments until the new tenant should come
into the house, when, if they were satisfied with her management, they
would continue as her boarders.

The last time I saw the Scarabee he was still at work on the meloe
question.  He expressed himself very pleasantly towards all of us, his
fellow-boarders, and spoke of the kindness and consideration with which
the Landlady had treated him when he had been straitened at times for
want of means.  Especially he seemed to be interested in our young couple
who were soon to be united.  His tired old eyes glistened as he asked
about them,--could it be that their little romance recalled some early
vision of his own?  However that may be, he got up presently and went to
a little box in which, as he said, he kept some choice specimens.  He
brought to me in his hand something which glittered.  It was an exquisite
diamond beetle.

--If you could get that to her,--he said,--they tell me that ladies
sometimes wear them in their hair.  If they are out of fashion, she can
keep it till after they're married, and then perhaps after a while there
may be--you know--you know what I mean--there may be larvae, that 's what
I 'm thinking there may be, and they 'll like to look at it.

--As he got out the word larvae, a faint sense of the ridiculous seemed
to take hold of the Scarabee, and for the first and only time during my
acquaintance with him a slight attempt at a smile showed itself on his
features.  It was barely perceptible and gone almost as soon as seen, yet
I am pleased to put it on record that on one occasion at least in his
life the Scarabee smiled.

The old Master keeps adding notes and reflections and new suggestions to
his interleaved volume, but I doubt if he ever gives them to the public.
The study he has proposed to himself does not grow easier the longer it
is pursued.  The whole Order of Things can hardly be completely
unravelled in any single person's lifetime, and I suspect he will have to
adjourn the final stage of his investigations to that more luminous realm
where the Landlady hopes to rejoin the company of boarders who are
nevermore to meet around her cheerful and well-ordered table.

The curtain has now fallen, and I show myself a moment before it to thank
my audience and say farewell.  The second comer is commonly less welcome
than the first, and the third makes but a rash venture. I hope I have not
wholly disappointed those who have been so kind to my predecessors.

To you, Beloved, who have never failed to cut the leaves which hold my
record, who have never nodded over its pages, who have never hesitated in
your allegiance, who have greeted me with unfailing smiles and part from
me with unfeigned regrets, to you I look my last adieu as I bow myself
out of sight, trusting my poor efforts to your always kind remembrance.

          EPILOGUE TO THE BREAKFAST-TABLE SERIES

               AUTOCRAT--PROFESSOR--POET.

                    AT A BOOKSTORE.

                    Anno Domini 1972.

          A crazy bookcase, placed before
          A low-price dealer's open door;
          Therein arrayed in broken rows
          A ragged crew of rhyme and prose,
          The homeless vagrants, waifs and strays
          Whose low estate this line betrays
          (Set forth the lesser birds to lime)
          YOUR CHOICE AMONG THESE BOOKS, 1 DIME!

          Ho! dealer; for its motto's sake
          This scarecrow from the shelf I take;
          Three starveling volumes bound in one,
          Its covers warping in the sun.
          Methinks it hath a musty smell,
          I like its flavor none too well,
          But Yorick's brain was far from dull,
          Though Hamlet pah!'d, and dropped his skull.

          Why, here comes rain!  The sky grows dark,
         --Was that the roll of thunder?  Hark!
          The shop affords a safe retreat,
          A chair extends its welcome seat,
          The tradesman has a civil look
          (I've paid, impromptu, for my book),
          The clouds portend a sudden shower,
          I'll read my purchase for an hour.

                    ..............

          What have I rescued from the shelf?
          A Boswell, writing out himself!
          For though he changes dress and name,
          The man beneath is still the same,
          Laughing or sad, by fits and starts,
          One actor in a dozen parts,
          And whatsoe'er the mask may be,
          The voice assures us, This is he.

          I say not this to cry him clown;
          I find my Shakespeare in his clown,
          His rogues the self-same parent own;
          Nay!  Satan talks in Milton's tone!
          Where'er the ocean inlet strays,
          The salt sea wave its source betrays,
          Where'er the queen of summer blows,
          She tells the zephyr, "I'm the rose!"

          And his is not the playwright's page;
          His table does not ape the stage;
          What matter if the figures seen
          Are only shadows on a screen,
          He finds in them his lurking thought,
          And on their lips the words he sought,
          Like one who sits before the keys
          And plays a tune himself to please.

          And was he noted in his day?
          Read, flattered, honored?  Who shall say?
          Poor wreck of time the wave has cast
          To find a peaceful shore at last,
          Once glorying in thy gilded name
          And freighted deep with hopes of fame,
          Thy leaf is moistened with a tear,
          The first for many a long, long year!

          For be it more or less of art
          That veils the lowliest human heart
          Where passion throbs, where friendship glows,
          Where pity's tender tribute flows,
          Where love has lit its fragrant fire,
          And sorrow quenched its vain desire,
          For me the altar is divine,
          Its flame, its ashes,--all are mine!

          And thou, my brother, as I look
          And see thee pictured in thy book,
          Thy years on every page confessed
          In shadows lengthening from the west,
          Thy glance that wanders, as it sought
          Some freshly opening flower of thought,
          Thy hopeful nature, light and free,
          I start to find myself in thee!

          Come, vagrant, outcast, wretch forlorn
          In leather jerkin stained and torn,
          Whose talk has filled my idle hour
          And made me half forget the shower,
          I'll do at least as much for you,
          Your coat I'll patch, your gilt renew,
          Read you,--perhaps,--some other time.
          Not bad, my bargain!  Price one dime!
          Not bad, my bargain!  Price one dime!






OVER THE TEACUPS

by Oliver W. Holmes



PREFACE.


The kind way in which this series of papers has been received has been a
pleasure greater than I dared to anticipate. I felt that I was a late
comer in the midst of a crowd of ardent and eager candidates for public
attention, that I had already had my day, and that if, like the
unfortunate Frenchman we used read about, I had "come again," I ought not
to surprised if I received the welcome of "Monsieur Tonson."

It has not proved so. My old readers have come forward in the
pleasantest possible way and assured me that they were glad to see me
again. There is no need, therefore, of apologies or explanations. I
thought I had something left to say and I have found listeners. In
writing these papers I have had occupation and kept myself in relation
with my fellow-beings. New sympathies, new sources of encouragement, if
not of inspiration, have opened themselves before me and cheated the
least promising season of life of much that seemed to render it dreary
and depressing. What particularly pleased me has been the freedom of
criticisms which I have seen from disadvantageous comparisons of my later
with my earlier writings.

I should like a little rest from literary work before the requiescat
ensures my repose from earthly labors, but I will not be rash enough to
promise that I will not even once again greet my old and new readers if
the impulse becomes irresistible to renew a companionship which has been
to me such a source of happiness.

BEVERLY FARM, Mass., August, 1891.

O. W. H.




OVER THE TEACUPS.



I




INTRODUCTION.

This series of papers was begun in March, 1888. A single number was
printed, when it was interrupted the course of events, and not resumed
until nearly years later, in January, 1890. The plan of the series was
not formed in my mind when I wrote the number. In returning to my task I
found that my original plan had shaped itself in the underground
laboratory of my thought so that some changes had to be made in what I
had written. As I proceeded, the slight story which formed a part of my
programme eloped itself without any need of much contrivance on my, part.
Given certain characters in a writer's conception, if they are real to
him, as they ought to be they will act in such or such a way, according
to the law of their nature. It was pretty safe to assume that intimate
relations would spring up between some members of our mixed company; and
it was not rash conjecture that some of these intimacies might end in
such attachment as would furnish us hints, at least, of a love-story.

As to the course of the conversations which would take place, very little
could be guessed beforehand. Various subjects of interest would be
likely to present themselves, without definite order, oftentimes abruptly
and, as it would seem, capriciously. Conversation in such a mixed company
as that of "The Teacups" is likely to be suggestive rather than
exhaustive. Continuous discourse is better adapted to the lecture-room
than to the tea-table. There is quite enough of it, I fear too much,--in
these pages. But the reader must take the reports of our talks as they
were jotted down. A patchwork quilt is not like a piece of Gobelin
tapestry; but it has its place and its use.

Some will feel a temptation to compare these conversations with those
earlier ones, and remark unamiably upon their difference. This is hardly
fair, and is certainly not wise. They are produced under very different
conditions, and betray that fact in every line. It is better to take
them by themselves; and, if my reader finds anything to please or profit
from, I shall be contented, and he, I feel sure, will not be ungrateful.

The readers who take up this volume may recollect a series of
conversations held many years ago over the breakfast-table, and reported
for their more or less profitable entertainment. Those were not very
early breakfasts at which the talks took place, but at any rate the sun
was rising, and the guests had not as yet tired themselves with the
labors of the day. The morning cup of coffee has an exhilaration about
it which the cheering influence of the afternoon or evening cup of tea
cannot be expected to reproduce. The toils of the forenoon, the heats of
midday, in the warm season, the slanting light of the descending sun, or
the sobered translucency of twilight have subdued the vivacity of the
early day. Yet under the influence of the benign stimulant many trains
of thought which will bear recalling, may suggest themselves to some of
our quiet circle and prove not uninteresting to a certain number of
readers.

How early many of my old breakfast companions went off to bed! I am
thinking not merely of those who sat round our table, but of that larger
company of friends who listened to our conversations as reported. Dear
girl with the silken ringlets, dear boy with the down-shadowed cheek,
your grandfather, your grandmother, turned over the freshly printed
leaves that told the story of those earlier meetings around the plain
board where so many things were said and sung, not all of which have
quite faded from memory of this overburdened and forgetful time. Your
father, your mother, found the scattered leaves gathered in a volume, and
smiled upon them as not uncompanionable acquaintances. My tea-table
makes no promises. There is no programme of exercises to studied
beforehand. What if I should content myself with a single report of what
was said and done over our teacups? Perhaps my young reader would be
glad to let me off, for there are talkers enough who have not yet left
their breakfast-tables; and nobody can blame the young people for
preferring the thoughts and the language of their own generation, with
all its future before it, to those of their grandfathers contemporaries.

My reader, young or old, will please to observe that I have left myself
entire freedom as to the sources of what may be said over the teacups. I
have not told how many cups are commonly on the board, but by using the
plural I have implied that there is at least one other talker or listener
beside myself, and for all that appears there may be a dozen. There will
be no regulation length to my reports,--no attempt to make out a certain
number of pages. I have no contract to fill so many columns, no pledge
to contribute so many numbers. I can stop on this first page if I do not
care to say anything more, and let this article stand by itself if so
minded. What a sense of freedom it gives not to write by the yard or the
column!

When one writes for an English review or magazine at so many guineas a
sheet, the temptation is very great to make one's contribution cover as
many sheets as possible. We all know the metallic taste of articles
written under this powerful stimulus. If Bacon's Essays had been
furnished by a modern hand to the "Quarterly Review" at fifty guineas a
sheet, what a great book it would have taken to hold them!

The first thing which suggests itself to me, as I contemplate my slight
project, is the liability of repeating in the evening what I may have
said in the morning in one form or another, and printed in these or other
pages. When it suddenly flashes into the consciousness of a writer who
had been long before the public, "Why, I have said all that once or
oftener in my books or essays, and here it is again; the same old
thought, the same old image, the same old story!" it irritates him, and
is likely to stir up the monosyllables of his unsanctified vocabulary.
He sees in imagination a thousand readers, smiling or yawning as they say
to themselves, "We have had all that before," and turn to another
writer's performance for something not quite so stale and superfluous.
This is what the writer says to himself about the reader.

The idiot! Does the simpleton really think that everybody has read all
he has written? Does he really believe that everybody remembers all of
his, writer's, words he may happen to have read? At one of those famous
dinners of the Phi Beta Kappa Society; where no reporter was ever
admitted, and which nothing ever leaks out about what is said and done,
Mr. Edward Everett, in his after-dinner speech, quoted these lines from
the AEneid, giving a liberal English version of them, which he applied to
the Oration just delivered by Mr. Emerson:

   Tres imbris torti radios, tres nubis aquosae
   Addiderant, rutili tres ignis, et alitis Austri.

His nephew, the ingenious, inventive, and inexhaustible. Edward Everett
Hale, tells the story of this quotation, and of the various uses to which
it might plied in after-dinner speeches. How often he ventured to repeat
it at the Phi Beta Kappa dinners I am not sure; but as he reproduced it
with his lively embellishments and fresh versions and artful
circumlocutions, not one person in ten remembered that he had listened to
those same words in those same accents only a twelvemonth ago. The poor
deluded creatures who take it for granted that all the world remembers
what they have said, and laugh at them when they say it over again, may
profit by this recollection. But what if one does say the same
things,--of course in a little different form each time,--over her? If
he has anything to say worth saying, that is just what he ought to do.
Whether he ought to or not, it is very certain that this is what all who
write much or speak much necessarily must and will do. Think of the
clergyman who preaches fifty or a hundred or more sermons every year for
fifty years! Think of the stump speaker who shouts before a hundred
audiences during the same political campaign, always using the same
arguments, illustrations, and catchwords! Think of the editor, as
Carlyle has pictured him, threshing the same straw every morning, until
we know what is coming when we see the first line, as we do when we read
the large capitals at the head of a thrilling story, which ends in an
advertisement of an all-cleansing soap or an all-curing remedy!

The latch-key which opens into the inner chambers of my consciousness
fits, as I have sufficient reason to believe, the private apartments of a
good many other people's thoughts. The longer we live, the more we find
we are like other persons. When I meet with any facts in my own mental
experience, I feel almost sure that I shall find them repeated or
anticipated in the writings or the conversation of others. This feeling
gives one a freedom in telling his own personal history he could not have
enjoyed without it. My story belongs to you as much as to me. De te
fabula narratur. Change the personal pronoun,--that is all. It gives
many readers a singular pleasure to find a writer telling them something
they have long known or felt, but which they have never before found any
one to put in words for them. An author does not always know when he is
doing the service of the angel who stirred the waters of the pool of
Bethesda. Many a reader is delighted to find his solitary thought has a
companion, and is grateful to the benefactor who has strengthened him.
This is the advantage of the humble reader over the ambitious and
self-worshipping writer. It is not with him pereant illi, but beati sunt
illi qui pro nobis nostra dixerunt,-Blessed are those who have said our
good things for us.

What I have been saying of repetitions leads me into a train of
reflections like which I think many readers will find something in their
own mental history. The area of consciousness is covered by layers of
habitual thoughts, as a sea-beach is covered with wave-worn, rounded
pebbles, shaped, smoothed, and polished by long attrition against each
other. These thoughts remain very much the same from day to day, from
week to week; and as we grow older, from month to month, and from year to
year. The tides of wakening consciousness roll in upon them daily as we
unclose our eyelids, and keep up the gentle movement and murmur of
ordinary mental respiration until we close them again in slumber. When
we think we are thinking, we are for the most part only listening to
sound of attrition between these inert elements of intelligence. They
shift their places a little, they change their relations to each other,
they roll over and turn up new surfaces. Now and then a new fragment is
cast in among them, to be worn and rounded and takes its place with the
others, but the pebbled floor of consciousness is almost as stationary as
the pavement of a city thoroughfare.

It so happens that at this particular tine I have something to tell which
I am quite sure is not one of rolled pebbles which my reader has seen
before in any of my pages, or, as I feel confident, in those of any other
writer.

If my reader asks why I do not send the statement I am going to make to
some one of the special periodicals that deal with such subjects, my
answer is, that I like to tell my own stories at my own time, in own
chosen columns, where they will be read by a class of readers with whom I
like to talk.

All men of letters or of science, all writers well known to the public,
are constantly tampered with, in these days, by a class of predaceous and
hungry fellow-laborers who may be collectively spoken of as the
brain-tappers. They want an author's ideas on the subjects which
interest them, the inquirers, from the gravest religious and moral
questions to the most trivial matters of his habits and his whims and
fancies. Some of their questions he cannot answer; some he does not
choose to answer; some he is not yet ready to answer, and when he is
ready he prefers to select his own organ of publication. I do not find
fault with all the brain-tappers. Some of them are doing excellent
service by accumulating facts which could not otherwise be attained. Rut
one gets tired of the strings of questions sent him, to which he is
expected to return an answer, plucked, ripe or unripe, from his private
tree of knowledge. The brain-tappers are like the owner of the goose that
laid the golden eggs. They would have the embryos and germs of one's
thoughts out of the mental oviducts, and cannot wait for their
spontaneous evolution and extrusion.

The story I have promised is, on the whole, the most remarkable of a
series which I may have told in part at some previous date, but which, if
I have not told, may be worth recalling at a future time.

Some few of my readers may remember that in a former paper I suggested
the possibility of the existence of an idiotic area in the human mind,
corresponding to the blind spot in the human retina. I trust that I
shall not be thought to have let my wits go wandering in that region of
my own intellectual domain, when I relate a singular coincidence which
very lately occurred in my experience, and add a few remarks made by one
of our company on the delicate and difficult but fascinating subject
which it forces upon our attention. I will first copy the memorandum
made at the time:

"Remarkable coincidence. On Monday, April 18th, being at table from 6.30
P. M. to 7.30, with ________and ________ the two ladies of my
household, I told them of the case of 'trial by battel' offered by
Abraham Thornton in 1817. I mentioned his throwing down his glove, which
was not taken up by the brother of his victim, and so he had to be let
off, for the old law was still in force. I mentioned that Abraham
Thornton was said to have come to this country, 'and [I added] he may be
living near us, for aught that I know." I rose from the table, and found
an English letter waiting for me, left while I sat at dinner. A copy the
first portion of this letter:

'20 ALFRED PLACE, West (near Museum) South Kensington, LONDON, S. W.
April 7, 1887.
DR. O. W. HOLMES:

DEAR SIR,--In travelling, the other day, I met with a reprint of the very
interesting case of Thornton for murder, 1817. The prisoner pleaded
successfully the old Wager of Battel. I thought you would like to read
the account, and send it with this....

Yours faithfully,
FRED. RATHBONE.'

Mr. Rathbone is a well-known dealer in old Wedgwood and
eighteenth-century art. As a friend of my hospitable entertainer, Mr.
Willett, he had shown me many attentions in England, but I was not
expecting any communication from him; and when, fresh from my
conversation, I found this letter just arrived by mail, and left while I
was at table, and on breaking the seal read what I had a few moments
before been; telling, I was greatly surprised, and immediately made a
note of the occurrence, as given above.

I had long been familiar with all the details of this celebrated case,
but had not referred to it, so far as I can remember, for months or
years. I know of no train of thought which led me to speak of it on that
particular day. I had never alluded to it before in that company, nor
had I ever spoken of it with Mr. Rathbone.

I told this story over our teacups. Among the company at the table is a
young English girl. She seemed to be amused by the story. "Fancy!" she
said,--"how very very odd!" "It was a striking and curious coincidence,"
said the professor who was with us at the table. "As remarkable as two
teaspoons in one saucer," was the comment of a college youth who happened
to be one of the company. But the member of our circle whom the reader
will hereafter know as Number Seven, began stirring his tea in a nervous
sort of way, and I knew that he was getting ready to say something about
the case. An ingenious man he is, with a brain like a tinder-box, its
contents catching at any spark that is flying about. I always like to
hear what he says when his tinder brain has a spark fall into it. It
does not follow that because he is often wrong he may not sometimes be
right, for he is no fool. He treated my narrative very seriously.

The reader need not be startled at the new terms he introduces. Indeed, I
am not quite sure that some thinking people will not adopt his view of
the matter, which seems to have a degree of plausibility as he states and
illustrates it.

"The impulse which led you to tell that story passed directly from the
letter, which came charged from the cells of the cerebral battery of your
correspondent. The distance at which the action took place [the letter
was left on a shelf twenty-four feet from the place where I was sitting]
shows this charge to have been of notable intensity.

"Brain action through space without material symbolism, such as speech,
expression, etc., is analogous to electrical induction. Charge the prime
conductor of an electrical machine, and a gold-leaf electrometer, far off
from it, will at once be disturbed. Electricity, as we all know, can be
stored and transported as if it were a measurable fluid.

"Your incident is a typical example of cerebral induction from a source
containing stored cerebricity. I use this word, not to be found in my
dictionaries, as expressing the brain-cell power corresponding to
electricity. Think how long it was before we had attained any real
conception of the laws that govern the wonderful agent, which now works
in harness with the other trained and subdued forces! It is natural that
cerebricity should be the last of the unweighable agencies to be
understood. The human eye had seen heaven and earth and all that in them
is before it saw itself as our instruments enable us to see it. This
fact of yours, which seems so strange to you, belongs to a great series
of similar facts familiarly known now to many persons, and before long to
be recognized as generally as those relating to the electric telegraph
and the slaving `dynamo.'

"What! you cannot conceive of a charge of cerebricity fastening itself on
a letter-sheet and clinging to it for weeks, while it was shuffling about
in mail-bags, rolling over the ocean, and shaken up in railroad cars?
And yet the odor of a grain of musk will hang round a note or a dress for
a lifetime. Do you not remember what Professor Silliman says, in that
pleasant journal of his, about the little ebony cabinet which Mary, Queen
of Scots, brought with her from France,--how 'its drawers still exhale
the sweetest perfumes'? If they could hold their sweetness for more than
two hundred years, why should not a written page retain for a week or a
month the equally mysterious effluence poured over it from the thinking
marrow, and diffuse its vibrations to another excitable nervous centre?"

I have said that although our imaginative friend is given to wild
speculations, he is not always necessarily wrong. We know too little
about the laws of brain-force to be dogmatic with reference to it. I am,
myself, therefore, fully in sympathy with the psychological
investigators. When it comes to the various pretended sciences by which
men and women make large profits, attempts at investigation are very apt
to be used as lucrative advertisements for the charlatans. But a series
of investigations of the significance of certain popular beliefs and
superstitions, a careful study of the relations of certain facts to each
other,--whether that of cause and effect, or merely of coincidence,--is a
task not unworthy of sober-minded and well-trained students of nature.
Such a series of investigations has been recently instituted, and was
reported at a late meeting held in the rooms of the Boston Natural
History Society. The results were, mostly negative, and in one sense a
disappointment. A single case, related by Professor Royce, attracted a
good deal of attention. It was reported in the next morning's
newspapers, and will be given at full length, doubtless, in the next
number of the Psychological Journal. The leading facts were, briefly,
these: A lady in Hamburg, Germany, wrote, on the 22d of June last, that
she had what she supposed to be nightmare on the night of the 17th, five
days before. "It seemed," she wrote, "to belong to you; to be a horrid
pain in your head, as if it were being forcibly jammed into an iron
casque, or some such pleasant instrument of torture." It proved that on
that same 17th of June her sister was undergoing a painful operation at
the hands of a dentist. "No single case," adds Professor Royce, "proves,
or even makes probable, the existence of telepathic toothaches; but if
there are any more cases of this sort, we want to hear of them, and that
all the more because no folk-lore and no supernatural horrors have as yet
mingled with the natural and well-known impressions that people associate
with the dentist's chair."

The case I have given is, I am confident, absolutely free from every
source of error. I do not remember that Mr. Rathbone had communicated
with me since he sent me a plentiful supply of mistletoe a year ago last
Christmas. The account I received from him was cut out of "The Sporting
Times" of March 5, 1887. My own knowledge of the case came from "Kirby's
Wonderful Museum," a work presented to me at least thirty years ago. I
had not looked at the account, spoken of it, nor thought of it for a long
time, when it came to me by a kind of spontaneous generation, as it
seemed, having no connection with any previous train of thought that I
was aware of. I consider the evidence of entire independence, apart from
possible "telepathic" causation, completely water-proof, airtight,
incombustible, and unassailable.

I referred, when first reporting this curious case of coincidence, with
suggestive circumstances, to two others, one of which I said was the most
picturesque and the other the most unlikely, as it would seem, to happen.
This is the first of those two cases:--

Grenville Tudor Phillips was a younger brother of George Phillips, my
college classmate, and of Wendell Phillips, the great orator. He lived
in Europe a large part of his life, but at last returned, and, in the
year 1863, died at the house of his brother George. I read his death in
the paper; but, having seen and heard very little of him during his life,
should not have been much impressed by the fact, but for the following
occurrence: between the time of Grenville Phillips's death and his
burial, I was looking in upon my brother, then living in the house in
which we were both born. Some books which had been my father's were
stored in shelves in the room I used to occupy when at Cambridge.
Passing my eye over them, an old dark quarto attracted my attention. It
must be a Bible, I said to myself, perhaps a rare one,--the "Breeches"
Bible or some other interesting specimen. I took it from the shelves,
and, as I did so, an old slip of paper fell out and fluttered to the
floor. On lifting it I read these words:

The name is Grenville Tudor.

What was the meaning of this slip of paper coming to light at this time,
after reposing undisturbed so long? There was only one way of explaining
its presence in my father's old Bible;--a copy of the Scriptures which I
did not remember ever having handled or looked into before. In
christening a child the minister is liable to forget the name, just at
the moment when he ought to remember it. My father preached occasionally
at the Brattle Street Church. I take this for granted, for I remember
going with him on one occasion when he did so. Nothing was more likely
than that he should be asked to officiate at the baptism of the younger
son of his wife's first cousin, Judge Phillips. This slip was handed him
to remind him of the name: He brought it home, put it in that old Bible,
and there it lay quietly for nearly half a century, when, as if it had
just heard of Mr. Phillips's decease, it flew from its hiding-place and
startled the eyes of those who had just read his name in the daily column
of deaths. It would be hard to find anything more than a mere
coincidence here; but it seems curious enough to be worth telling.

The second of these two last stories must be told in prosaic detail to
show its whole value as a coincidence.

One evening while I was living in Charles Street, I received a call from
Dr. S., a well-known and highly respected Boston physician, a particular
friend of the late Alexander H. Stephens, vice-president of the Southern
Confederacy. It was with reference to a work which Mr. Stephens was
about to publish that Dr. S. called upon me. After talking that matter
over we got conversing on other subjects, among the rest a family
relationship existing between us,--not a very near one, but one which I
think I had seen mentioned in genealogical accounts. Mary S. (the last
name being the same as that of my visitant), it appeared, was the
great-great-grandmother of Mrs. H. and myself. After cordially
recognizing our forgotten relationship, now for the first time called to
mind, we parted, my guest leaving me for his own home. We had been
sitting in my library on the lower floor. On going up-stairs where Mrs.
H. was sitting alone, just as I entered the room she pushed a paper
across the table towards me, saying that perhaps it might interest me.
It was one of a number of old family papers which she had brought from
the house of her mother, recently deceased.

I opened the paper, which was an old-looking document, and found that it
was a copy, perhaps made in this century, of the will of that same Mary
S. about whom we had been talking down-stairs.

If there is such a thing as a purely accidental coincidence this must be
considered an instance of it.

All one can say about it is that it seems very unlikely that such a
coincidence should occur, but it did.

I have not tried to keep my own personality out of these stories. But
after all, how little difference it makes whether or not a writer appears
with a mask on which everybody can take off,--whether he bolts his door
or not, when everybody can look in at his windows, and all his entrances
are at the mercy of the critic's skeleton key and the jimmy of any
ill-disposed assailant!

The company have been silent listeners for the most part; but the reader
will have a chance to become better acquainted with some cf them by and
by.




II

TO THE READER.

I know that it is a hazardous experiment to address myself again to a
public which in days long past has given me a generous welcome. But my
readers have been, and are, a very faithful constituency. I think there
are many among them who would rather listen to an old voice they are used
to than to a new one of better quality, even if the "childish treble"
should betray itself now and then in the tones of the overtired organ.
But there must be others,--I am afraid many others,--who will exclaim:
"He has had his day, and why can't he be content? We don't want literary
revenants, superfluous veterans, writers who have worn out their welcome
and still insist on being attended to. Give us something fresh,
something that belongs to our day and generation. Your morning draught
was well enough, but we don't care for your evening slip-slop. You are
not in relation with us, with our time, our ideas, our aims, our
aspirations."

Alas, alas! my friend,--my young friend, for your hair is not yet
whitened,--I am afraid you are too nearly right. No doubt,--no doubt.
Teacups are not coffee-cups. They do not hold so much. Their pallid
infusion is but a feeble stimulant compared with the black decoction
served at the morning board. And so, perhaps, if wisdom like yours were
compatible with years like mine, I should drop my pen and make no further
attempts upon your patience.

But suppose that a writer who has reached and passed the natural limit of
serviceable years feels that he has some things which he would like to
say, and which may have an interest for a limited class of readers,--is
he not right in trying his powers and calmly taking the risk of failure?
Does it not seem rather lazy and cowardly, because he cannot "beat his
record," or even come up to the level of what he has done in his prime,
to shrink from exerting his talent, such as it is, now that he has
outlived the period of his greatest vigor? A singer who is no longer
equal to the trials of opera on the stage may yet please at a chamber
concert or in the drawing-room. There is one gratification an old author
can afford a certain class of critics: that, namely, of comparing him as
he is with what he was. It is a pleasure to mediocrity to have its
superiors brought within range, so to speak; and if the ablest of them
will only live long enough, and keep on writing, there is no pop-gun that
cannot reach him. But I fear that this is an unamiable reflection, and I
am at this time in a very amiable mood.

I confess that there is something agreeable to me in renewing my
relations with the reading public. Were it but a single appearance, it
would give me a pleasant glimpse of the time when I was known as a
frequent literary visitor. Many of my readers--if I can lure any from
the pages of younger writers will prove to be the children, or the
grandchildren, of those whose acquaintance I made something more than a
whole generation ago. I could depend on a kind welcome from my
contemporaries,--my coevals. But where are those contemporaries? Ay de
mi! as Carlyle used to exclaim,--Ah, dear me! as our old women say,--I
look round for them, and see only their vacant places. The old vine
cannot unwind its tendrils. The branch falls with the decay of its
support, and must cling to the new growths around it, if it would not lie
helpless in the dust. This paper is a new tendril, feeling its way, as
it best may, to whatever it can wind around. The thought of finding here
and there an old friend, and making, it may be, once in a while a new
one, is very grateful to me. The chief drawback to the pleasure is the
feeling that I am submitting to that inevitable exposure which is the
penalty of authorship in every form. A writer must make up his mind to
the possible rough treatment of the critics, who swarm like bacteria
whenever there is any literary material on which they can feed. I have
had as little to complain of as most writers, yet I think it is always
with reluctance that one encounters the promiscuous handling which the
products of the mind have to put up with, as much as the fruit and
provisions in the market-stalls. I had rather be criticised, however,
than criticise; that is, express my opinions in the public prints of
other writers' work, if they are living, and can suffer, as I should
often have to make them. There are enough, thank Heaven, without me. We
are literary cannibals, and our writers live on each other and each
other's productions to a fearful extent. What the mulberry leaf is to
the silk-worm, the author's book, treatise, essay, poem, is to the
critical larva; that feed upon it. It furnishes them with food and
clothing. The process may not be agreeable to the mulberry leaf or to
the printed page; but without it the leaf would not have become the silk
that covers the empress's shoulders, and but for the critic the author's
book might never have reached the scholar's table. Scribblers will feed
on each other, and if we insist on being scribblers we must consent to be
fed on. We must try to endure philosophically what we cannot help, and
ought not, I suppose, to wish to help.

It is the custom at our table to vary the usual talk, by the reading of
short papers, in prose or verse, by one or more of The Teacups, as we are
in the habit of calling those who make up our company. Thirty years ago,
one of our present circle--"Teacup Number Two," The Professor,--read a
paper on Old Age, at a certain Breakfast-table, where he was in the habit
of appearing. That paper was published at the time, and has since seen
the light in other forms. He did not know so much about old age then as
he does now, and would doubtless write somewhat differently if he took
the subject up again. But I found that it was the general wish that
another of our company should let us hear what he had to say about it. I
received a polite note, requesting me to discourse about old age,
inasmuch as I was particularly well qualified by my experience to write
in an authoritative way concerning it. The fact is that I,--for it is
myself who am speaking,--have recently arrived at the age of threescore
years and twenty,--fourscore years we may otherwise call it. In the
arrangement of our table, I am Teacup Number One, and I may as well say
that I am often spoken of as The Dictator. There is nothing invidious in
this, as I am the oldest of the company, and no claim is less likely to
excite jealousy than that of priority of birth.

I received congratulations on reaching my eightieth birthday, not only
from our circle of Teacups, but from friends, near and distant, in large
numbers. I tried to acknowledge these kindly missives with the aid of a
most intelligent secretary; but I fear that there were gifts not thanked
for, and tokens of good-will not recognized. Let any neglected
correspondent be assured that it was not intentionally that he or she was
slighted. I was grateful for every such mark of esteem; even for the
telegram from an unknown friend in a distant land, for which I cheerfully
paid the considerable charge which the sender doubtless knew it would
give me pleasure to disburse for such an expression of friendly feeling.

I will not detain the reader any longer from the essay I have promised.

This is the paper read to The Teacups.

It is in A Song of Moses that we find the words, made very familiar to us
by the Episcopal Burial Service, which place the natural limit on life at
threescore years and ten, with an extra ten years for some of a stronger
constitution than the average. Yet we are told that Moses himself lived
to be a hundred and twenty years old, and that his eye was not dim nor
his natural strength abated. This is hard to accept literally, but we
need not doubt that he was very old, and in remarkably good condition for
a man of his age. Among his followers was a stout old captain, Caleb,
the son of Jephunneh. This ancient warrior speaks of himself in these
brave terms: "Lo, I am this day fourscore and five years old. As yet, I
am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me; as my
strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war, both to go out
and to come in." It is not likely that anybody believed his brag about
his being as good a man for active service at eighty-five as he was at
forty, when Moses sent him out to spy the land of Canaan. But he was, no
doubt, lusty and vigorous for his years, and ready to smite the
Canaanites hip and thigh, and drive them out, and take possession of
their land, as he did forthwith, when Moses gave him leave.

Grand old men there were, three thousand years ago! But not all
octogenarians were like Caleb, the son of Jephunneh. Listen to poor old
Barzillai, and hear him piping: "I am this day fourscore years old; and
can I discern between good and evil? Can thy servant taste what I eat or
what I drink? Can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing
women? Wherefore, then, should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord
the king?" And poor King David was worse off than this, as you all
remember, at the early age of seventy.

Thirty centuries do not seem to have made any very great difference in
the extreme limits of life. Without pretending to rival the alleged
cases of life prolonged beyond the middle of its second century, such as
those of Henry Jenkins and Thomas Parr, we can make a good showing of
centenarians and nonagenarians. I myself remember Dr. Holyoke, of Salem,
son of a president of Harvard College, who answered a toast proposed in
his honor at a dinner given to him on his hundredth birthday.

"Father Cleveland," our venerated city missionary, was born June 21,
1772, and died June 5, 1872, within a little more than a fortnight of his
hundredth birthday. Colonel Perkins, of Connecticut, died recently after
celebrating his centennial anniversary.

Among nonagenarians, three whose names are well known to Bostonians, Lord
Lyndhurst, Josiah Quincy, and Sidney Bartlett, were remarkable for
retaining their faculties in their extreme age. That patriarch of our
American literature, the illustrious historian of his country, is still
with us, his birth dating in 1800.

Ranke, the great German historian, died at the age of ninety-one, and
Chevreul, the eminent chemist, at that of a hundred and two.

Some English sporting characters have furnished striking examples of
robust longevity. In Gilpin's "Forest Scenery" there is the story of one
of these horseback heroes. Henry Hastings was the name of this old
gentleman, who lived in the time of Charles the First. It would be hard
to find a better portrait of a hunting squire than that which the Earl of
Shaftesbury has the credit of having drawn of this very peculiar
personage. His description ends by saying, "He lived to be an hundred,
and never lost his eyesight nor used spectacles. He got on horseback
without help, and rode to the death of the stag till he was past
fourscore."

Everything depends on habit. Old people can do, of course, more or less
well, what they have been doing all their lives; but try to teach them
any new tricks, and the truth of the old adage will very soon show
itself. Mr. Henry Hastings had done nothing but hunt all his days, and
his record would seem to have been a good deal like that of Philippus
Zaehdarm in that untranslatable epitaph which may be found in "Sartor
Resartus." Judged by its products, it was a very short life of a hundred
useless twelve months.

It is something to have climbed the white summit, the Mont Blanc of
fourscore. A small number only of mankind ever see their eightieth
anniversary. I might go to the statistical tables of the annuity and
life insurance offices for extended and exact information, but I prefer
to take the facts which have impressed themselves upon me in my own
career.

The class of 1829 at Harvard College, of which I am a member, graduated,
according to the triennial, fifty-nine in number. It is sixty years,
then, since that time; and as they were, on an average, about twenty
years old, those who survive must have reached fourscore years. Of the
fifty-nine graduates ten only are living, or were at the last accounts;
one in six, very nearly. In the first ten years after graduation, our
third decade, when we were between twenty and thirty years old, we lost
three members,--about one in twenty; between the ages of thirty and
forty, eight died,--one in seven of those the decade began with; from
forty to fifty, only two,--or one in twenty-four; from fifty to sixty,
eight,--or one in six; from sixty to seventy, fifteen,--or two out of
every five; from seventy to eighty, twelve,--or one in two. The greatly
increased mortality which began with our seventh decade went on steadily
increasing. At sixty we come "within range of the rifle-pits," to borrow
an expression from my friend Weir Mitchell.

Our eminent classmate, the late Professor Benjamin Peirce, showed by
numerical comparison that the men of superior ability outlasted the
average of their fellow-graduates. He himself lived a little beyond his
threescore and ten years. James Freeman Clarke almost reached the age of
eighty. The eighth decade brought the fatal year for Benjamin Robbins
Curtis, the great lawyer, who was one of the judges of the Supreme Court
of the United States; for the very able chief justice of Massachusetts,
George Tyler Bigelow; and for that famous wit and electric centre of
social life, George T. Davis. At the last annual dinner every effort was
made to bring all the survivors of the class together. Six of the ten
living members were there, six old men in the place of the thirty or
forty classmates who surrounded the long, oval table in 1859, when I
asked, "Has there any old fellow got mixed with the boys?"--11 boys whose
tongues were as the vibrating leaves of the forest; whose talk was like
the voice of many waters; whose laugh was as the breaking of mighty waves
upon the seashore. Among the six at our late dinner was our first
scholar, the thorough-bred and accomplished engineer who held the city of
Lawrence in his brain before it spread itself out along the banks of the
Merrimac. There, too, was the poet whose National Hymn, "My Country, 't
is of thee," is known to more millions, and dearer to many of them, than
all the other songs written since the Psalms of David. Four of our six
were clergymen; the engineer and the present writer completed the list.
Were we melancholy? Did we talk of graveyards and epitaphs? No,--we
remembered our dead tenderly, serenely, feeling deeply what we had lost
in those who but a little while ago were with us. How could we forget
James Freeman Clarke, that man of noble thought and vigorous action, who
pervaded this community with his spirit, and was felt through all its
channels as are the light and the strength that radiate through the wires
which stretch above us? It was a pride and a happiness to have such
classmates as he was to remember. We were not the moping, complaining
graybeards that many might suppose we must have been. We had been
favored with the blessing of long life. We had seen the drama well into
its fifth act. The sun still warmed us, the air was still grateful and
life-giving. But there was another underlying source of our cheerful
equanimity, which we could not conceal from ourselves if we had wished to
do it. Nature's kindly anodyne is telling upon us more and more with
every year. Our old doctors used to give an opiate which they called
"the black drop." It was stronger than laudanum, and, in fact, a
dangerously powerful narcotic. Something like this is that potent drug
in Nature's pharmacopoeia which she reserves for the time of need,--the
later stages of life. She commonly begins administering it at about the
time of the "grand climacteric," the ninth septennial period, the
sixty-third year. More and more freely she gives it, as the years go on,
to her grey-haired children, until, if they last long enough, every
faculty is benumbed, and they drop off quietly into sleep under its
benign influence.

Do you say that old age is unfeeling? It has not vital energy enough to
supply the waste of the more exhausting emotions. Old Men's Tears, which
furnished the mournful title to Joshua Scottow's Lamentations, do not
suggest the deepest grief conceivable. A little breath of wind brings
down the raindrops which have gathered on the leaves of the tremulous
poplars. A very slight suggestion brings the tears from Marlborough's
eyes, but they are soon over, and he is smiling again as an allusion
carries him back to the days of Blenheim and Malplaquet. Envy not the
old man the tranquillity of his existence, nor yet blame him if it
sometimes looks like apathy. Time, the inexorable, does not threaten him
with the scythe so often as with the sand-bag. He does not cut, but he
stuns and stupefies. One's fellow-mortals can afford to be as considerate
and tender with him as Time and Nature.

There was not much boasting among us of our present or our past, as we
sat together in the little room at the great hotel. A certain amount of
self-deception is quite possible at threescore years and ten, but at
three score years and twenty Nature has shown most of those who live to
that age that she is earnest, and means to dismantle and have done with
them in a very little while. As for boasting of our past, the laudator
temporis acti makes but a poor figure in our time. Old people used to
talk of their youth as if there were giants in those days. We knew some
tall men when we were young, but we can see a man taller than any one
among them at the nearest dime museum. We had handsome women among us,
of high local reputation, but nowadays we have professional beauties who
challenge the world to criticise them as boldly as Phryne ever challenged
her Athenian admirers. We had fast horses,--did not "Old Blue" trot a
mile in three minutes? True, but there is a three-year-old colt just put
on the track who has done it in a little more than two thirds of that
time. It seems as if the material world had been made over again since
we were boys. It is but a short time since we were counting up the
miracles we had lived to witness. The list is familiar enough: the
railroad, the ocean steamer, photography, the spectroscope, the
telegraph, telephone, phonograph, anesthetics, electric
illumination,--with such lesser wonders as the friction match, the sewing
machine, and the bicycle. And now, we said, we must have come to the end
of these unparalleled developments of the forces of nature. We must rest
on our achievements. The nineteenth century is not likely to add to
them; we must wait for the twentieth century. Many of us, perhaps most
of us, felt in that way. We had seen our planet furnished by the art of
man with a complete nervous system: a spinal cord beneath the ocean,
secondary centres,--ganglions,--in all the chief places where men are
gathered together, and ramifications extending throughout civilization.
All at once, by the side of this talking and light-giving apparatus, we
see another wire stretched over our heads, carrying force to a vast
metallic muscular system,--a slender cord conveying the strength of a
hundred men, of a score of horses, of a team of elephants. The lightning
is tamed and harnessed, the thunderbolt has become a common carrier. No
more surprises in this century! A voice whispers, What next?

It will not do for us to boast about our young days and what they had to
show. It is a great deal better to boast of what they could not show,
and, strange as it may seem, there is a certain satisfaction in it. In
these days of electric lighting, when you have only to touch a button and
your parlor or bedroom is instantly flooded with light, it is a pleasure
to revert to the era of the tinder-box, the flint and steel, and the
brimstone match. It gives me an almost proud satisfaction to tell how we
used, when those implements were not at hand or not employed, to light
our whale-oil lamp by blowing a live coal held against the wick, often
swelling our cheeks and reddening our faces until we were on the verge of
apoplexy. I love to tell of our stage-coach experiences, of our
sailing-packet voyages, of the semi-barbarous destitution of all modern
comforts and conveniences through which we bravely lived and came out the
estimable personages you find us.

Think of it! All my boyish shooting was done with a flint-lock gun; the
percussion lock came to me as one of those new-fangled notions people had
just got hold of. We ancients can make a grand display of minus
quantities in our reminiscences, and the figures look almost as well as
if they had the plus sign before them.

I am afraid that old people found life rather a dull business in the time
of King David and his rich old subject and friend, Barzillai, who, poor
man, could not have read a wicked novel, nor enjoyed a symphony concert,
if they had had those luxuries in his day. There were no pleasant
firesides, for there were no chimneys. There were no daily newspapers
for the old man to read, and he could not read them if there were, with
his dimmed eyes, nor hear them read, very probably, with his dulled ears.
There was no tobacco, a soothing drug, which in its various forms is a
great solace to many old men and to some old women, Carlyle and his
mother used to smoke their pipes together, you remember.

Old age is infinitely more cheerful, for intelligent people at least,
than it was two or three thousand years ago. It is our duty, so far as
we can, to keep it so. There will always be enough about it that is
solemn, and more than enough, alas! that is saddening. But how much
there is in our times to lighten its burdens! If they that look out at
the windows be darkened, the optician is happy to supply them with
eye-glasses for use before the public, and spectacles for their hours of
privacy. If the grinders cease because they are few, they can be made
many again by a third dentition, which brings no toothache in its train.
By temperance and good Habits of life, proper clothing, well-warmed,
well-drained, and well-ventilated dwellings, and sufficient, not too much
exercise, the old man of our time may keep his muscular strength in very
good condition. I doubt if Mr. Gladstone, who is fast nearing his
eightieth birthday, would boast, in the style of Caleb, that he was as
good a man with his axe as he was when he was forty, but I would back
him,--if the match were possible, for a hundred shekels, against that
over-confident old Israelite, to cut down and chop up a cedar of Lebanon.
I know a most excellent clergyman, not far from my own time of life, whom
I would pit against any old Hebrew rabbi or Greek philosopher of his
years and weight, if they could return to the flesh, to run a quarter of
a mile on a good, level track.

We must not make too much of such exceptional cases of prolonged
activity. I often reproached my dear friend and classmate, Tames Freeman
Clarke, that his ceaseless labors made it impossible for his coevals to
enjoy the luxury of that repose which their years demanded. A wise old
man, the late Dr. James Walker, president of Harvard University, said
that the great privilege of old age was the getting rid of
responsibilities. These hard-working veterans will not let one get rid
of them until he drops in his harness, and so gets rid of them and his
life together. How often has many a tired old man envied the
superannuated family cat, stretched upon the rug before the fire, letting
the genial warmth tranquilly diffuse itself through all her internal
arrangements! No more watching for mice in dark, damp cellars, no more
awaiting the savage gray rat at the mouth of his den, no more scurrying
up trees and lamp-posts to avoid the neighbor's cur who wishes to make
her acquaintance! It is very grand to "die in harness," but it is very
pleasant to have the tight straps unbuckled and the heavy collar lifted
from the neck and shoulders.

It is natural enough to cling to life. We are used to atmospheric
existence, and can hardly conceive of ourselves except as breathing
creatures. We have never tried any other mode of being, or, if we have,
we have forgotten all about it, whatever Wordsworth's grand ode may tell
us we remember. Heaven itself must be an experiment to every human soul
which shall find itself there. It may take time for an earthborn saint
to become acclimated to the celestial ether,--that is, if time can be
said to exist for a disembodied spirit. We are all sentenced to capital
punishment for the crime of living, and though the condemned cell of our
earthly existence is but a narrow and bare dwelling-place, we have
adjusted ourselves to it, and made it tolerably comfortable for the
little while we are to be confined in it. The prisoner of Chillon

   "regained [his] freedom with a sigh,"

and a tender-hearted mortal might be pardoned for looking back, like the
poor lady who was driven from her dwelling-place by fire and brimstone,
at the home he was leaving for the "undiscovered country."

On the other hand, a good many persons, not suicidal in their tendencies,
get more of life than they want. One of our wealthy citizens said, on
hearing that a friend had dropped off from apoplexy, that it made his
mouth water to hear of such a case. It was an odd expression, but I have
no doubt that the fine old gentleman to whom it was attributed made use
of it. He had had enough of his gout and other infirmities. Swift's
account of the Struldbrugs is not very amusing reading for old people,
but some may find it a consolation to reflect on the probable miseries
they escape in not being doomed to an undying earthly existence.

There are strange diversities in the way in which different old persons
look upon their prospects. A millionaire whom I well remember confessed
that he should like to live long enough to learn how much a certain
fellow-citizen, a multimillionaire, was worth. One of the, three
nonagenarians before referred to expressed himself as having a great
curiosity about the new sphere of existence to which he was looking
forward.

The feeling must of necessity come to many aged persons that they have
outlived their usefulness; that they are no longer wanted, but rather in
the way, drags on the wheels rather than helping them forward. But let
them remember the often-quoted line of Milton,

   "They also serve who only stand and wait."

This is peculiarly true of them. They are helping others without always
being aware of it. They are the shields, the breakwaters, of those who
come after them. Every decade is a defence of the one next behind it.
At thirty the youth has sobered into manhood, but the strong men of forty
rise in almost unbroken rank between him and the approaches of old age as
they show in the men of fifty. At forty he looks with a sense of
security at the strong men of fifty, and sees behind them the row of
sturdy sexagenarians. When fifty is reached, somehow sixty does not look
so old as it once used to, and seventy is still afar off. After sixty
the stern sentence of the burial service seems to have a meaning that one
did not notice in former years. There begins to be something personal
about it. But if one lives to seventy he soon gets used to the text with
the threescore years and ten in it, and begins to count himself among
those who by reason of strength are destined to reach fourscore, of whom
he can see a number still in reasonably good condition. The octogenarian
loves to read about people of ninety and over. He peers among the
asterisks of the triennial catalogue of the University for the names of
graduates who have been seventy years out of college and remain still
unstarred. He is curious about the biographies of centenarians. Such
escapades as those of that terrible old sinner and ancestor of great men,
the Reverend Stephen Bachelder, interest him as they never did before.
But he cannot deceive himself much longer. See him walking on a level
surface, and he steps off almost as well as ever; but watch him coming
down a flight of stairs, and the family record could not tell his years
more faithfully. He cut you dead, you say? Did it occur to you that he
could not see you clearly enough to know you from any other son or
daughter of Adam? He said he was very glad to hear it, did he, when you
told him that your beloved grandmother had just deceased? Did you happen
to remember that though he does not allow that he is deaf, he will not
deny that he does not hear quite so well as he used to? No matter about
his failings; the longer he holds on to life, the longer he makes life
seem to all the living who follow him, and thus he is their constant
benefactor.

Every stage of existence has its special trials and its special
consolations. Habits are the crutches of old age; by the aid of these we
manage to hobble along after the mental joints are stiff and the muscles
rheumatic, to speak metaphorically,--that is to say, when every act of
self-determination costs an effort and a pang. We become more and more
automatic as we grow older, and if we lived long enough we should come to
be pieces of creaking machinery like Maelzel's chess player,--or what
that seemed to be.

Emerson was sixty-three years old, the year I have referred to as that of
the grand climacteric, when he read to his son the poem he called
"Terminus," beginning:

     "It is time to be old,
     To take in sail.
     The God of bounds,
     Who sets to seas a shore,
     Came to me in his fatal rounds
     And said, 'No more!'"

It was early in life to feel that the productive stage was over, but he
had received warning from within, and did not wish to wait for outside
advices. There is all the difference in the world in the mental as in
the bodily constitution of different individuals. Some must "take in
sail" sooner, some later. We can get a useful lesson from the American
and the English elms on our Common. The American elms are quite bare,
and have been so for weeks. They know very well that they are going to
have storms to wrestle with; they have not forgotten the gales of
September and the tempests of the late autumn and early winter. It is a
hard fight they are going to have, and they strip their coats off and
roll up their shirt-sleeves, and show themselves bare-armed and ready for
the contest. The English elms are of a more robust build, and stand
defiant, with all their summer clothing about their sturdy frames. They
may yet have to learn a lesson of their American cousins, for
notwithstanding their compact and solid structure they go to pieces in
the great winds just as ours do. We must drop much of our foliage before
winter is upon us. We must take in sail and throw over cargo, if that is
necessary, to keep us afloat. We have to decide between our duties and
our instinctive demand of rest. I can believe that some have welcomed
the decay of their active powers because it furnished them with
peremptory reasons for sparing themselves during the few years that were
left them.

Age brings other obvious changes besides the loss of active power. The
sensibilities are less keen, the intelligence is less lively, as we might
expect under the influence of that narcotic which Nature administers.
But there is another effect of her "black drop" which is not so commonly
recognized. Old age is like an opium-dream. Nothing seems real except
what is unreal. I am sure that the pictures painted by the
imagination,--the faded frescos on the walls of memory,--come out in
clearer and brighter colors than belonged to them many years earlier.
Nature has her special favors for her children of every age, and this is
one which she reserves for our second childhood.

No man can reach an advanced age without thinking of that great change to
which, in the course of nature, he must be so near. It has been remarked
that the sterner beliefs of rigid theologians are apt to soften in their
later years. All reflecting persons, even those whose minds have been
half palsied by the deadly dogmas which have done all they could to
disorganize their thinking powers,--all reflecting persons, I say, must
recognize, in looking back over a long life, how largely their creeds,
their course of life, their wisdom and unwisdom, their whole characters,
were shaped by the conditions which surrounded them. Little children
they came from the hands of the Father of all; little children in their
helplessness, their ignorance, they are going back to Him. They cannot
help feeling that they are to be transferred from the rude embrace of the
boisterous elements to arms that will receive them tenderly. Poor
planetary foundlings, they have known hard treatment at the hands of the
brute forces of nature, from the control of which they are soon to be set
free. There are some old pessimists, it is true, who believe that they
and a few others are on a raft, and that the ship which they have
quitted, holding the rest of mankind, is going down with all on board.
It is no wonder that there should be such when we remember what have been
the teachings of the priesthood through long series of ignorant
centuries. Every age has to shape the Divine image it worships over
again,--the present age and our own country are busily engaged in the
task at this time. We unmake Presidents and make new ones. This is an
apprenticeship for a higher task. Our doctrinal teachers are unmaking
the Deity of the Westminster Catechism and trying to model a new one,
with more of modern humanity and less of ancient barbarism in his
composition. If Jonathan Edwards had lived long enough, I have no doubt
his creed would have softened into a kindly, humanized belief.

Some twenty or thirty years ago, I said to Longfellow that certain
statistical tables I had seen went to show that poets were not a
long-lived race. He doubted whether there was anything to prove they
were particularly short-lived. Soon after this, he handed me a list he
had drawn up. I cannot lay my hand upon it at this moment, but I
remember that Metastasio was the oldest of them all. He died at the age
of eighty-four. I have had some tables made out, which I have every
reason to believe are correct so far as they go. From these, it appears
that twenty English poets lived to the average age of fifty-six years and
a little over. The eight American poets on the list averaged
seventy-three and a half, nearly, and they are not all dead yet. The
list including Greek, Latin, Italian, and German poets, with American and
English, gave an average of a little over sixty-two years. Our young
poets need not be alarmed. They can remember that Bryant lived to be
eighty-three years old, that Longfellow reached seventy-five and Halleck
seventy-seven, while Whittier is living at the age of nearly eighty-two.
Tennyson is still writing at eighty, and Browning reached the age of
seventy-seven.

Shall a man who in his younger days has written poetry, or what passed
for it, continue to attempt it in his later years? Certainly, if it
amuses or interests him, no one would object to his writing in verse as
much as he likes. Whether he should continue to write for the public is
another question. Poetry is a good deal a matter of heart-beats, and the
circulation is more languid in the later period of life. The joints are
less supple; the arteries are more or less "ossified." Something like
these changes has taken place in the mind. It has lost the flexibility,
the plastic docility, which it had in youth and early manhood, when the
gristle had but just become hardened into bone. It is the nature of
poetry to writhe itself along through the tangled growths of the
vocabulary, as a snake winds through the grass, in sinuous, complex, and
unexpected curves, which crack every joint that is not supple as
india-rubber.

I had a poem that I wanted to print just here. But after what I have
this moment said, I hesitated, thinking that I might provoke the obvious
remark that I exemplified the unfitness of which I had been speaking. I
remembered the advice I had given to a poetical aspirant not long since,
which I think deserves a paragraph to itself.

My friend, I said, I hope you will not write in verse. When you write in
prose you say what you mean. When you write in rhyme you say what you
must.

Should I send this poem to the publishers, or not?

   "Some said, 'John, print it;' others said, 'Not so.'"

I did not ask "some" or "others." Perhaps I should have thought it best
to keep my poem to myself and the few friends for whom it was written.
All at once, my daimon--that other Me over whom I button my waistcoat
when I button it over my own person--put it into my head to look up the
story of Madame Saqui. She was a famous danseuse, who danced Napoleon in
and out, and several other dynasties besides. Her last appearance was at
the age of seventy-six, which is rather late in life for the tight rope,
one of her specialties. Jules Janin mummified her when she died in 1866,
at the age of eighty. He spiced her up in his eulogy as if she had been
the queen of a modern Pharaoh. His foamy and flowery rhetoric put me
into such a state of good-nature that I said, I will print my poem, and
let the critical Gil Blas handle it as he did the archbishop's sermon, or
would have done, if he had been a writer for the "Salamanca Weekly."

It must be premised that a very beautiful loving cup was presented to me
on my recent birthday, by eleven ladies of my acquaintance. This was the
most costly and notable of all the many tributes I received, and for
which in different forms I expressed my gratitude.

          TO THE ELEVEN LADIES

   WHO PRESENTED ME WITH A SILVER LOVING CUP ON THE
     TWENTY-NINTH OF AUGUST, M DCCC LXXXIX.

   "Who gave this cup?" The secret thou wouldst steal
   Its brimming flood forbids it to reveal:
   No mortal's eye shall read it till he first
   Cool the red throat of thirst.

   If on the golden floor one draught remain,
   Trust me, thy careful search will be in vain;
   Not till the bowl is emptied shalt thou know
   The names enrolled below.

   Deeper than Truth lies buried in her well
   Those modest names the graven letters spell
   Hide from the sight; but, wait, and thou shalt see
   Who the good angels be

   Whose bounty glistens in the beauteous gift
   That friendly hands to loving lips shall lift:
   Turn the fair goblet when its floor is dry,
   Their names shall meet thine eye.

   Count thou their number on the beads of Heaven,
   Alas! the clustered Pleiads are but seven;
   Nay, the nine sister Muses are too few,
   --The Graces must add two.

   "For whom this gift?" For one who all too long
   Clings to his bough among the groves of song;
   Autumn's last leaf, that spreads its faded wing
   To greet a second spring.

   Dear friends, kind friends, whate'er the cup may hold,
   Bathing its burnished depths, will change to gold
   Its last bright drop let thirsty Maenads drain,
   Its fragrance will remain.

   Better love's perfume in the empty bowl
   Than wine's nepenthe for the aching soul
   Sweeter than song that ever poet sung,
   It makes an old heart young!



III

After the reading of the paper which was reported in the preceding number
of this record, the company fell into talk upon the subject with which it
dealt.

The Mistress. "I could have wished you had said more about the religious
attitude of old age as such. Surely the thoughts of aged persons must be
very much taken up with the question of what is to become of them. I
should like to have The Dictator explain himself a little more fully on
this point."

My dear madam, I said, it is a delicate matter to talk about. You
remember Mr. Calhoun's response to the advances of an over-zealous
young clergyman who wished to examine him as to his outfit for the
long journey. I think the relations between man and his Maker grow
more intimate, more confidential, if I may say so, with advancing
years. The old man is less disposed to argue about special matters
of belief, and more ready to sympathize with spiritually minded
persons without anxious questioning as to the fold to which they
belong. That kindly judgment which he exercises with regard to
others he will, naturally enough, apply to himself. The caressing
tone in which the Emperor Hadrian addresses his soul is very much
like that of an old person talking with a grandchild or some other
pet:

  "Animula, vagula, blandula,
   Hospes comesque corporis."

  "Dear little, flitting, pleasing sprite,
   The body's comrade and its guest."

How like the language of Catullus to Lesbia's sparrow!

More and more the old man finds his pleasures in memory, as the present
becomes unreal and dreamlike, and the vista of his earthly future narrows
and closes in upon him. At last, if he live long enough, life comes to
be little more than a gentle and peaceful delirium of pleasing
recollections. To say, as Dante says, that there is no greater grief
than to remember past happiness in the hour of misery is not giving the
whole truth. In the midst of the misery, as many would call it, of
extreme old age, there is often a divine consolation in recalling the
happy moments and days and years of times long past. So beautiful are
the visions of bygone delight that one could hardly wish them to become
real, lest they should lose their ineffable charm. I can almost conceive
of a dozing and dreamy centenarian saying to one he loves, "Go, darling,
go! Spread your wings and leave me. So shall you enter that world of
memory where all is lovely. I shall not hear the sound of your footsteps
any more, but you will float before me, an aerial presence. I shall not
hear any word from your lips, but I shall have a deeper sense of your
nearness to me than speech can give. I shall feel, in my still solitude,
as the Ancient Mariner felt when the seraph band gathered before him:

  "'No voice did they impart
   No voice; but oh! the silence sank
   Like music on my heart.'"

I said that the lenient way in which the old look at the failings of
others naturally leads them to judge themselves more charitably. They
find an apology for their short-comings and wrong-doings in another
consideration. They know very well that they are not the same persons as
the middle-aged individuals, the young men, the boys, the children, that
bore their names, and whose lives were continuous with theirs. Here is
an old man who can remember the first time he was allowed to go shooting.
What a remorseless young destroyer he was, to be sure! Wherever he saw a
feather, wherever a poor little squirrel showed his bushy tail, bang!
went the old "king's arm," and the feathers or the fur were set flying
like so much chaff. Now that same old man,--the mortal that was called
by his name and has passed for the same person for some scores of
years,--is considered absurdly sentimental by kind-hearted women, because
he opens the fly-trap and sets all its captives free,--out-of-doors, of
course, but the dear souls all insisting, meanwhile, that the flies will,
every one of them, be back again in the house before the day is over. Do
you suppose that venerable sinner expects to be rigorously called to
account for the want of feeling he showed in those early years, when the
instinct of destruction, derived from his forest-roaming ancestors, led
him to acts which he now looks upon with pain and aversion?

"Senex" has seen three generations grow up, the son repeating the virtues
and the failings of the father, the grandson showing the same
characteristics as the father and grandfather. He knows that if such or
such a young fellow had lived to the next stage of life he would very
probably have caught up with his mother's virtues, which, like a graft of
a late fruit on an early apple or pear tree, do not ripen in her children
until late in the season. He has seen the successive ripening of one
quality after another on the boughs of his own life, and he finds it hard
to condemn himself for faults which only needed time to fall off and be
succeeded by better fruitage. I cannot help thinking that the recording
angel not only drops a tear upon many a human failing, which blots it out
forever, but that he hands many an old record-book to the imp that does
his bidding, and orders him to throw that into the fire instead of the
sinner for whom the little wretch had kindled it.

"And pitched him in after it, I hope," said Number Seven, who is in some
points as much of an optimist as any one among us, in spite of the squint
in his brain,--or in virtue of it, if you choose to have it so.

"I like Wordsworth's 'Matthew,'" said Number Five, "as well as any
picture of old age I remember."

"Can you repeat it to us?" asked one of The Teacups.

"I can recall two verses of it," said Number Five, and she recited the
two following ones. Number Five has a very sweet voice. The moment she
speaks all the faces turn toward her. I don't know what its secret is,
but it is a voice that makes friends of everybody.

  "'The sighs which Matthew heaved were sighs
   Of one tired out with fun and madness;
   The tears which came to Matthew's eyes
   Were tears of light, the dew of gladness.

  "'Yet, sometimes, when the secret cup
   Of still and serious thought went round,
   It seemed as if he drank it up,
   He felt with spirit so profound:'

"This was the way in which Wordsworth paid his tribute to a

  "'Soul of God's best earthly mould.'"

The sweet voice left a trance-like silence after it, which may have
lasted twenty heart-beats. Then I said, We all thank you for your
charming quotation. How much more wholesome a picture of humanity than
such stuff as the author of the "Night Thoughts" has left us:

  "Heaven's Sovereign saves all beings but Himself
   That hideous sight, a naked human heart."

Or the author of "Don Juan," telling us to look into

  "Man's heart, and view the hell that's there!"

I hope I am quoting correctly, but I am more of a scholar in Wordsworth
than in Byron. Was Parson Young's own heart such a hideous spectacle to
himself?

If it was, he had better have stripped off his surplice. No,--it was
nothing but the cant of his calling. In Byron it was a mood, and he
might have said just the opposite thing the next day, as he did in his
two descriptions of the Venus de' Medici. That picture of old Matthew
abides in the memory, and makes one think better of his kind. What nobler
tasks has the poet than to exalt the idea of manhood, and to make the
world we live in more beautiful?

We have two or three young people with us who stand a fair chance of
furnishing us the element without which life and tea-tables alike are
wanting in interest. We are all, of course, watching them, and curious
to know whether we are to have a romance or not. Here is one of them;
others will show themselves presently.

I cannot say just how old the Tutor is, but I do not detect a gray hair
in his head. My sight is not so good as it was, however, and he may have
turned the sharp corner of thirty, and even have left it a year or two
behind him. More probably he is still in the twenties,--say twenty-eight
or twenty-nine. He seems young, at any rate, excitable, enthusiastic,
imaginative, but at the same time reserved. I am afraid that he is a
poet. When I say "I am afraid," you wonder what I mean by the
expression. I may take another opportunity to explain and justify it; I
will only say now that I consider the Muse the most dangerous of sirens
to a young man who has his way to make in the world. Now this young man,
the Tutor, has, I believe, a future before him. He was born for a
philosopher,--so I read his horoscope,--but he has a great liking for
poetry and can write well in verse. We have had a number of poems
offered for our entertainment, which I have commonly been requested to
read. There has been some little mystery about their authorship, but it
is evident that they are not all from the same hand. Poetry is as
contagious as measles, and if a single case of it break out in any social
circle, or in a school, there are certain to be a number of similar
cases, some slight, some serious, and now and then one so malignant that
the subject of it should be put on a spare diet of stationery, say from
two to three penfuls of ink and a half sheet of notepaper per diem. If
any of our poetical contributions are presentable, the reader shall have
a chance to see them.

It must be understood that our company is not invariably made up of the
same persons. The Mistress, as we call her, is expected to be always in
her place. I make it a rule to be present. The Professor is almost as
sure to be at the table as I am. We should hardly know what to do
without Number Five. It takes a good deal of tact to handle such a
little assembly as ours, which is a republic on a small scale, for all
that they give me the title of Dictator, and Number Five is a great help
in every social emergency. She sees when a discussion tends to become
personal, and heads off the threatening antagonists. She knows when a
subject has been knocking about long enough and dexterously shifts the
talk to another track. It is true that I am the one most frequently
appealed to as the highest tribunal in doubtful cases, but I often care
more for Number Five's opinion than I do for my own. Who is this Number
Five, so fascinating, so wise, so full of knowledge, and so ready to
learn? She is suspected of being the anonymous author of a book which
produced a sensation when published, not very long ago, and which those
who read are very apt to read a second time, and to leave on their tables
for frequent reference. But we have never asked her. I do not think she
wants to be famous. How she comes to be unmarried is a mystery to me; it
must be that she has found nobody worth caring enough for. I wish she
would furnish us with the romance which, as I said, our tea-table needs
to make it interesting. Perhaps the new-comer will make love to her,--I
should think it possible she might fancy him.

And who is the new-comer? He is a Counsellor and a Politician. Has a
good war record. Is about forty-five years old, I conjecture. Is
engaged in a great law case just now. Said to be very eloquent. Has an
intellectual head, and the bearing of one who has commanded a regiment or
perhaps a brigade. Altogether an attractive person, scholarly, refined
has some accomplishments not so common as they might be in the class we
call gentlemen, with an accent on the word.

There is also a young Doctor, waiting for his bald spot to come, so that
he may get into practice.

We have two young ladies at the table,--the English girl referred to in a
former number, and an American girl of about her own age. Both of them
are students in one of those institutions--I am not sure whether they
call it an "annex" or not; but at any rate one of those schools where
they teach the incomprehensible sort of mathematics and other bewildering
branches of knowledge above the common level of high-school education.
They seem to be good friends, and form a very pleasing pair when they
walk in arm in arm; nearly enough alike to seem to belong together,
different enough to form an agreeable contrast.

Of course we were bound to have a Musician at our table, and we have one
who sings admirably, and accompanies himself, or one or more of our
ladies, very frequently.

Such is our company when the table is full. But sometimes only half a
dozen, or it may be only three or four, are present. At other times we
have a visitor or two, either in the place of one of our habitual number,
or in addition to it. We have the elements, we think, of a pleasant
social gathering,--different sexes, ages, pursuits, and tastes,--all that
is required for a "symphony concert" of conversation. One of the curious
questions which might well be asked by those who had been with us on
different occasions would be, "How many poets are there among you?"
Nobody can answer this question. It is a point of etiquette with us not
to press our inquiries about these anonymous poems too sharply,
especially if any of them betray sentiments which would not bear rough
handling.

I don't doubt that the different personalities at our table will get
mixed up in the reader's mind if he is not particularly clear-headed.
That happens very often, much oftener than all would be willing to
confess, in reading novels and plays. I am afraid we should get a good
deal confused even in reading our Shakespeare if we did not look back now
and then at the dramatis personae. I am sure that I am very apt to
confound the characters in a moderately interesting novel; indeed, I
suspect that the writer is often no better off than the reader in the
dreary middle of the story, when his characters have all made their
appearance, and before they have reached near enough to the denoument to
have fixed their individuality by the position they have arrived at in
the chain of the narrative.

My reader might be a little puzzled when he read that Number Five did or
said such or such a thing, and ask, "Whom do you mean by that title? I
am not quite sure that I remember." Just associate her with that line of
Emerson,

   "Why nature loves the number five,"

and that will remind you that she is the favorite of our table.

You cannot forget who Number Seven is if I inform you that he specially
prides himself on being a seventh son of a seventh son. The fact of such
a descent is supposed to carry wonderful endowments with it. Number
Seven passes for a natural healer. He is looked upon as a kind of
wizard, and is lucky in living in the nineteenth century instead of the
sixteenth or earlier. How much confidence he feels in himself as the
possessor of half-supernatural gifts I cannot say. I think his peculiar
birthright gives him a certain confidence in his whims and fancies which
but for that he would hardly feel. After this explanation, when I speak
of Number Five or Number Seven, you will know to whom I refer.

The company are very frank in their criticisms of each other. "I did not
like that expression of yours, planetary foundlings," said the Mistress.
"It seems to me that it is too like atheism for a good Christian like you
to use."

Ah, my dear madam, I answered, I was thinking of the elements and the
natural forces to which man was born an almost helpless subject in the
rudimentary stages of his existence, and from which he has only partially
got free after ages upon ages of warfare with their tyranny. Think what
hunger forced the caveman to do! Think of the surly indifference of the
storms that swept the forest and the waters, the earthquake chasms that
engulfed him, the inundations that drowned him out of his miserable
hiding-places, the pestilences that lay in wait for him, the unequal
strife with ferocious animals! I need not sum up all the wretchedness
that goes to constitute the "martyrdom of man." When our forefathers
came to this wilderness as it then was, and found everywhere the bones of
the poor natives who had perished in the great plague (which our Doctor
there thinks was probably the small-pox), they considered this
destructive malady as a special mark of providential favor for them. How
about the miserable Indians? Were they anything but planetary
foundlings? No! Civilization is a great foundling hospital, and
fortunate are all those who get safely into the creche before the frost
or the malaria has killed them, the wild beasts or the venomous reptiles
worked out their deadly appetites and instincts upon them. The very idea
of humanity seems to be that it shall take care of itself and develop its
powers in the "struggle for life." Whether we approve it or not, if we
can judge by the material record, man was born a foundling, and fought
his way as he best might to that kind of existence which we call
civilized,--one which a considerable part of the inhabitants of our
planet have reached.

If you do not like the expression planetary foundlings, I have no
objection to your considering the race as put out to nurse. And what a
nurse Nature is! She gives her charge a hole in the rocks to live in,
ice for his pillow and snow for his blanket, in one part of the world;
the jungle for his bedroom in another, with the tiger for his watch-dog,
and the cobra as his playfellow.

Well, I said, there may be other parts of the universe where there are no
tigers and no cobras. It is not quite certain that such realms of
creation are better off, on the whole, than this earthly residence of
ours, which has fought its way up to the development of such centres of
civilization as Athens and Rome, to such personalities as Socrates, as
Washington.

"One of our company has been on an excursion among the celestial bodies
of our system, I understand," said the Professor.

Number Five colored. "Nothing but a dream," she said. "The truth is, I
had taken ether in the evening for a touch of neuralgia, and it set my
imagination at work in a way quite unusual with me. I had been reading a
number of books about an ideal condition of society,--Sir Thomas Mores
'Utopia,' Lord Bacon's 'New Atlantis,' and another of more recent date.
I went to bed with my brain a good deal excited, and fell into a deep
slumber, in which I passed through some experiences so singular that, on
awaking, I put them down on paper. I don't know that there is anything
very original about the experiences I have recorded, but I thought them
worth preserving. Perhaps you would not agree with me in that belief."

"If Number Five will give us a chance to form our own judgment about her
dream or vision, I think we shall enjoy it," said the Mistress. "She
knows what will please The Teacups in the way of reading as well as I do
how many lumps of sugar the Professor wants in his tea and how many I
want in mine."

The company was so urgent that Number Five sent up-stairs for her paper.

Number Five reads the story of her dream.

It cost me a great effort to set down the words of the manuscript from
which I am reading. My dreams for the most part fade away so soon after
their occurrence that I cannot recall them at all. But in this case my
ideas held together with remarkable tenacity. By keeping my mind
steadily upon the work, I gradually unfolded the narrative which follows,
as the famous Italian antiquary opened one of those fragile carbonized
manuscripts found in the ruins of Herculaneum or Pompeii.

The first thing I remember about it is that I was floating upward,
without any sense of effort on my part. The feeling was that of flying,
which I have often had in dreams, as have many other persons. It was the
most natural thing in the world,--a semi-materialized volition, if I may
use such an expression.

At the first moment of my new consciousness,--for I seemed to have just
emerged from a deep slumber, I was aware that there was a companion at my
side. Nothing could be more gracious than the way in which this being
accosted me. I will speak of it as she, because there was a delicacy, a
sweetness, a divine purity, about its aspect that recalled my ideal of
the loveliest womanhood.

"I am your companion and your guide," this being made me understand, as
she looked at me. Some faculty of which I had never before been
conscious had awakened in me, and I needed no interpreter to explain the
unspoken language of my celestial attendant.

"You are not yet outside of space and time," she said, "and I am going
with you through some parts of the phenomenal or apparent universe,--what
you call the material world. We have plenty of what you call time before
us, and we will take our voyage leisurely, looking at such objects of
interest as may attract our attention as we pass. The first thing you
will naturally wish to look at will be the earth you have just left.
This is about the right distance," she said, and we paused in our flight.

The great globe we had left was rolling beneath us. No eye of one in the
flesh could see it as I saw or seemed to see it. No ear of any mortal
being could bear the sounds that came from it as I heard or seemed to
hear them. The broad oceans unrolled themselves before me. I could
recognize the calm Pacific and the stormy Atlantic,--the ships that
dotted them, the white lines where the waves broke on the shore,--frills
on the robes of the continents,--so they looked to my woman's perception;
the--vast South American forests; the glittering icebergs about the
poles; the snowy mountain ranges, here and there a summit sending up fire
and smoke; mighty rivers, dividing provinces within sight of each other,
and making neighbors of realms thousands of miles apart; cities;
light-houses to insure the safety of sea-going vessels, and war-ships to
knock them to pieces and sink them. All this, and infinitely more,
showed itself to me during a single revolution of the sphere: twenty-four
hours it would have been, if reckoned by earthly measurements of time. I
have not spoken of the sounds I heard while the earth was revolving under
us. The howl of storms, the roar and clash of waves, the crack and crash
of the falling thunderbolt,--these of course made themselves heard as
they do to mortal ears. But there were other sounds which enchained my
attention more than these voices of nature. As the skilled leader of an
orchestra hears every single sound from each member of the mob of
stringed and wind instruments, and above all the screech of the straining
soprano, so my sharpened perceptions made what would have been for common
mortals a confused murmur audible to me as compounded of innumerable
easily distinguished sounds. Above them all arose one continued,
unbroken, agonizing cry. It was the voice of suffering womanhood, a
sound that goes up day and night, one long chorus of tortured victims.

"Let us get out of reach of this," I said; and we left our planet, with
its blank, desolate moon staring at it, as if it had turned pale at the
sights and sounds it had to witness.

Presently the gilded dome of the State House, which marked our
starting-point, came into view for the second time, and I knew that this
side-show was over. I bade farewell to the Common with its Cogswell
fountain, and the Garden with its last awe-inspiring monument.

"Oh, if I could sometimes revisit these beloved scenes!" I exclaimed.

"There is nothing to hinder that I know of," said my companion. "Memory
and imagination as you know them in the flesh are two winged creatures
with strings tied to their legs, and anchored to a bodily weight of a
hundred and fifty pounds, more or less. When the string is cut you can
be where you wish to be,--not merely a part of you, leaving the rest
behind, but the whole of you. Why shouldn't you want to revisit your old
home sometimes?"

I was astonished at the human way in which my guide conversed with me.
It was always on the basis of my earthly habits, experiences, and
limitations. "Your solar system," she said, "is a very small part of the
universe, but you naturally feel a curiosity about the bodies which
constitute it and about their inhabitants. There is your moon: a bare
and desolate-looking place it is, and well it may be, for it has no
respirable atmosphere, and no occasion for one. The Lunites do not
breathe; they live without waste and without supply. You look as if you
do not understand this. Yet your people have, as you well know, what
they call incandescent lights everywhere. You would have said there can
be no lamp without oil or gas, or other combustible substance, to feed
it; and yet you see a filament which sheds a light like that of noon all
around it, and does not waste at all. So the Lunites live by influx of
divine energy, just as the incandescent lamp glows,--glows, and is not
consumed; receiving its life, if we may call it so, from the central
power, which wears the unpleasant name of 'dynamo.'"

The Lunites appeared to me as pale phosphorescent figures of ill-defined
outline, lost in their own halos, as it were. I could not help thinking
of Shelley's

        "maiden
     With white fire laden."

But as the Lunites were after all but provincials, as are the tenants of
all the satellites, I did not care to contemplate them for any great
length of time.

I do not remember much about the two planets that came next to our own,
except the beautiful rosy atmosphere of one and the huge bulk of the
other. Presently, we found ourselves within hailing distance of another
celestial body, which I recognized at once, by the rings which girdled
it, as the planet Saturn. A dingy, dull-looking sphere it was in its
appearance. "We will tie up here for a while," said my attendant. The
easy, familiar way in which she spoke surprised and pleased me.

Why, said I,--The Dictator,--what is there to prevent beings of another
order from being as cheerful, as social, as good companions, as the very
liveliest of God's creatures whom we have known in the flesh? Is it
impossible for an archangel to smile? Is such a phenomenon as a laugh
never heard except in our little sinful corner of the universe? Do you
suppose, that when the disciples heard from the lips of their Master the
play of words on the name of Peter, there was no smile of appreciation on
the bearded faces of those holy men? From any other lips we should have
called this pleasantry a--

Number Five shook her head very slightly, and gave me a look that seemed
to say, "Don't frighten the other Teacups. We don't call things by the
names that belong to them when we deal with celestial subjects."

We tied up, as my attendant playfully called our resting, so near the
planet that I could know--I will not say see and hear, but apprehend--all
that was going on in that remote sphere; remote, as we who live in what
we have been used to consider the centre of the rational universe regard
it. What struck me at once was the deadness of everything I looked upon.
Dead, uniform color of surface and surrounding atmosphere. Dead
complexion of all the inhabitants. Dead-looking trees, dead-looking
grass, no flowers to be seen anywhere.

"What is the meaning of all this?" I said to my guide.

She smiled good-naturedly, and replied, "It is a forlorn home for
anything above a lichen or a toadstool; but that is no wonder, when you
know what the air is which they breathe. It is pure nitrogen."

The Professor spoke up. "That can't be, madam," he said. "The
spectroscope shows the atmosphere of Saturn to be--no matter, I have
forgotten what; but it was not pure nitrogen, at any rate."

Number Five is never disconcerted. "Will you tell me," she said, "where
you have found any account of the bands and lines in the spectrum of
dream-nitrogen? I should be so pleased to become acquainted with them."

The Professor winced a little, and asked Delilah, the handmaiden, to pass
a plate of muffins to him. The dream had carried him away, and he
thought for the moment that he was listening to a scientific paper.

Of course, my companion went on to say, the bodily constitution of the
Saturnians is wholly different from that of air-breathing, that is
oxygen-breathing, human beings. They are the dullest, slowest, most
torpid of mortal creatures.

All this is not to be wondered at when you remember the inert
characteristics of nitrogen. There are in some localities natural
springs which give out slender streams of oxygen. You will learn by and
by what use the Saturnians make of this dangerous gas, which, as you
recollect, constitutes about one fifth of your own atmosphere. Saturn has
large lead mines, but no other metal is found on this planet. The
inhabitants have nothing else to make tools of, except stones and shells.
The mechanical arts have therefore made no great progress among them.
Chopping down a tree with a leaden axe is necessarily a slow process.

So far as the Saturnians can be said to have any pride in anything, it is
in the absolute level which characterizes their political and social
order. They profess to be the only true republicans in the solar system.
The fundamental articles of their Constitution are these:

All Saturnians are born equal, live equal, and die equal.

All Saturnians are born free,--free, that is, to obey the rules laid down
for the regulation of their conduct, pursuits, and opinions, free to be
married to the person selected for them by the physiological section of
the government, and free to die at such proper period of life as may best
suit the convenience and general welfare of the community.

The one great industrial product of Saturn is the bread-root. The
Saturnians find this wholesome and palatable enough; and it is well they
do, as they have no other vegetable. It is what I should call a most
uninteresting kind of eatable, but it serves as food and drink, having
juice enough, so that they get along without water. They have a tough,
dry grass, which, matted together, furnishes them with clothes
sufficiently warm for their cold-blooded constitutions, and more than
sufficiently ugly.

A piece of ground large enough to furnish bread-root for ten persons is
allotted to each head of a household, allowance being made for the
possible increase of families. This, however, is not a very important
consideration, as the Saturnians are not a prolific race. The great
object of life being the product of the largest possible quantity of
bread-roots, and women not being so capable in the fields as the stronger
sex, females are considered an undesirable addition to society. The one
thing the Saturnians dread and abhor is inequality. The whole object of
their laws and customs is to maintain the strictest equality in
everything,--social relations, property, so far as they can be said to
have anything which can be so called, mode of living, dress, and all
other matters. It is their boast that nobody ever starved under their
government. Nobody goes in rags, for the coarse-fibred grass from which
they fabricate their clothes is very durable. (I confess I wondered how
a woman could live in Saturn. They have no looking-glasses. There is no
such article as a ribbon known among them. All their clothes are of one
pattern. I noticed that there were no pockets in any of their garments,
and learned that a pocket would be considered prima facie evidence of
theft, as no honest person would have use for such a secret receptacle.)
Before the revolution which established the great law of absolute and
lifelong equality, the inhabitants used to feed at their own private
tables. Since the regeneration of society all meals are taken in common.
The last relic of barbarism was the use of plates,--one or even more to
each individual. This "odious relic of an effete civilization," as they
called it, has long been superseded by oblong hollow receptacles, one of
which is allotted to each twelve persons. A great riot took place when
an attempt was made by some fastidious and exclusive egotists to
introduce partitions which should partially divide one portion of these
receptacles into individual compartments. The Saturnians boast that they
have no paupers, no thieves, none of those fictitious values called
money,--all which things, they hear, are known in that small Saturn
nearer the sun than the great planet which is their dwelling-place.

"I suppose that now they have levelled everything they are quiet and
contented. Have they any of those uneasy people called reformers?"

"Indeed they have," said my attendant. "There are the Orthobrachians,
who declaim against the shameful abuse of the left arm and hand, and
insist on restoring their perfect equality with the right. Then there
are Isopodic societies, which insist on bringing back the original
equality of the upper and lower limbs. If you can believe it, they
actually practise going on all fours,--generally in a private way, a few
of them together, but hoping to bring the world round to them in the near
future."

Here I had to stop and laugh.

"I should think life might be a little dull in Saturn," I said.

"It is liable to that accusation," she answered. "Do you notice how many
people you meet with their mouths stretched wide open?"

"Yes," I said, "and I do not know what to make of it. I should think
every fourth or fifth person had his mouth open in that way."

"They are suffering from the endemic disease of their planet, prolonged
and inveterate gaping or yawning, which has ended in dislocation of the
lower jaw. After a time this becomes fixed, and requires a difficult
surgical operation to restore it to its place."

It struck me that, in spite of their boast that they have no paupers, no
thieves, no money, they were a melancholy-looking set of beings.

"What are their amusements?" I asked.

"Intoxication and suicide are their chief recreations. They have a way
of mixing the oxygen which issues in small jets from certain natural
springs with their atmospheric nitrogen in the proportion of about twenty
per cent, which makes very nearly the same thing as the air of your
planet. But to the Saturnians the mixture is highly intoxicating, and is
therefore a relief to the monotony of their every-day life. This mixture
is greatly sought after, but hard to obtain, as the sources of oxygen are
few and scanty. It shortens the lives of those who have recourse to it;
but if it takes too long, they have other ways of escaping from a life
which cuts and dries everything for its miserable subjects, defeats all
the natural instincts, confounds all individual characteristics, and
makes existence such a colossal bore, as your worldly people say, that
self-destruction becomes a luxury."

Number Five stopped here.

Your imaginary wholesale Shakerdom is all very fine, said I. Your
Utopia, your New Atlantis, and the rest are pretty to look at. But your
philosophers are treating the world of living souls as if they were, each
of them, playing a game of solitaire,--all the pegs and all the holes
alike. Life is a very different sort of game. It is a game of chess,
and not of solitaire, nor even of checkers. The men are not all pawns,
but you have your knights, bishops, rooks,--yes, your king and queen,--to
be provided for. Not with these names, of course, but all looking for
their proper places, and having their own laws and modes of action. You
can play solitaire with the members of your own family for pegs, if you
like, and if none of them rebel. You can play checkers with a little
community of meek, like-minded people. But when it comes to the handling
of a great state, you will find that nature has emptied a box of chessmen
before you, and you must play with them so as to give each its proper
move, or sweep them off the board, and come back to the homely game such
as I used to see played with beans and kernels of corn on squares marked
upon the back of the kitchen bellows.

It was curious to see how differently Number Five's narrative was
received by the different listeners in our circle. Number Five herself
said she supposed she ought to be ashamed of its absurdities, but she did
not know that it was much sillier than dreams often are, and she thought
it might amuse the company. She was herself always interested by these
ideal pictures of society. But it seemed to her that life must be dull
in any of them, and with that idea in her head her dreaming fancy had
drawn these pictures.

The Professor was interested in her conception of the existence of the
Lunites without waste, and the death in life of the nitrogen-breathing
Saturnians. Dream-chemistry was a new subject to him. Perhaps Number
Five would give him some lessons in it.

At this she smiled, and said she was afraid she could not teach him
anything, but if he would answer a few questions in matter-of-fact
chemistry which had puzzled her she would be vastly obliged to him.

"You must come to my laboratory," said the Professor.

"I will come to-morrow," said Number Five.

Oh, yes! Much laboratory work they will do! Play of mutual affinities.
Amalgamates. No freezing mixtures, I'll warrant!

Why shouldn't we get a romance out of all this, hey?

But Number Five looks as innocent as a lamb, and as brave as a lion. She
does not care a copper for the looks that are going round The Teacups.

Our Doctor was curious about those cases of anchylosis, as he called it,
of the lower jaw. He thought it a quite possible occurrence. Both the
young girls thought the dream gave a very hard view of the optimists, who
look forward to a reorganization of society which shall rid mankind of
the terrible evils of over-crowding and competition.

Number Seven was quite excited about the matter. He had himself drawn up
a plan for a new social arrangement. He had shown it to the legal
gentleman who has lately joined us. This gentleman thought it
well-intended, but that it would take one constable to every three
inhabitants to enforce its provisions.

I said the dream could do no harm; it was too outrageously improbable to
come home to anybody's feelings. Dreams were like broken mosaics,--the
separated stones might here and there make parts of pictures. If one
found a caricature of himself made out of the pieces which had
accidentally come together, he would smile at it, knowing that it was an
accidental effect with no malice in it. If any of you really believe in
a working Utopia, why not join the Shakers, and convert the world to this
mode of life? Celibacy alone would cure a great many of the evils you
complain of.

I thought this suggestion seemed to act rather unfavorably upon the
ladies of our circle. The two Annexes looked inquiringly at each other.
Number Five looked smilingly at them. She evidently thought it was time
to change the subject of conversation, for she turned to me and said,
"You promised to read us the poem you read before your old classmates the
other evening."

I will fulfill my promise, I said. We felt that this might probably be
our last meeting as a Class. The personal reference is to our greatly
beloved and honored classmate, James Freeman Clarke.

   AFTER THE CURFEW.

   The Play is over. While the light
   Yet lingers in the darkening hall,

   I come to say a last Good-night
   Before the final Exeunt all.

   We gathered once, a joyous throng:
   The jovial toasts went gayly round;
   With jest, and laugh, and shout, and song
   we made the floors and walls resound.

   We come with feeble steps and slow,
   A little band of four or five,
   Left from the wrecks of long ago,
   Still pleased to find ourselves alive.

   Alive! How living, too, are they
   whose memories it is ours to share!
   Spread the long table's full array,
   There sits a ghost in every chair!

   One breathing form no more, alas!
   Amid our slender group we see;
   With him we still remained "The Class,"
   without his presence what are we?

   The hand we ever loved to clasp,
   That tireless hand which knew no rest,
   Loosed from affection's clinging grasp,
   Lies nerveless on the peaceful breast.

   The beaming eye, the cheering voice,
   That lent to life a generous glow,
   whose every meaning said "Rejoice,"
   we see, we hear, no more below.

   The air seems darkened by his loss,
   Earth's shadowed features look less fair,
   And heavier weighs the daily cross
   His willing shoulders helped as bear.

   Why mourn that we, the favored few

   Whom grasping Time so long has spared
   Life's sweet illusions to pursue,
   The common lot of age have shared?

   In every pulse of Friendship's heart
   There breeds unfelt a throb of pain,
   One hour must rend its links apart,
   Though years on years have forged the chain.

   So ends "The Boys,"--a lifelong play.
   We too must hear the Prompter's call
   To fairer scenes and brighter day
   Farewell! I let the curtain fall.




IV

If the reader thinks that all these talking Teacups came together by mere
accident, as people meet at a boarding-house, I may as well tell him at
once that he is mistaken. If he thinks I am going to explain how it is
that he finds them thus brought together, whether they form a secret
association, whether they are the editors of this or that periodical,
whether they are connected with some institution, and so on,--I must
disappoint him. It is enough that he finds them in each other's company,
a very mixed assembly, of different sexes, ages, and pursuits; and if
there is a certain mystery surrounds their meetings, he must not be
surprised. Does he suppose we want to be known and talked about in
public as "Teacups"? No; so far as we give to the community some records
of the talks at our table our thoughts become public property, but the
sacred personality of every Teacup must be properly respected. If any
wonder at the presence of one of our number, whose eccentricities might
seem to render him an undesirable associate of the company, he should
remember that some people may have relatives whom they feel bound to keep
their eye on; besides the cracked Teacup brings out the ring of the sound
ones as nothing else does. Remember also that soundest teacup does not
always hold the best tea, or the cracked teacup the worst.

This is a hint to the reader, who is not expected to be too curious about
the individual Teacups constituting our unorganized association.

The Dictator Discourses.

I have been reading Balzac's Peau de Chagrin. You have all read the
story, I hope, for it is the first of his wonderful romances which fixed
the eyes of the reading world upon him, and is a most fascinating if
somewhat fantastic tale. A young man becomes the possessor of a certain
magic skin, the peculiarity of which is that, while it gratifies every
wish formed by its possessor, it shrinks in all its dimensions each time
that a wish is gratified. The young man makes every effort to ascertain
the cause of its shrinking; invokes the aid of the physicist, the
chemist, the student of natural history, but all in vain. He draws a red
line around it. That same day he indulges a longing for a certain
object. The next morning there is a little interval between the red line
and the skin, close to which it was traced. So always, so inevitably.
As he lives on, satisfying one desire, one passion, after another, the
process of shrinking continues. A mortal disease sets in, which keeps
pace with the shrinking skin, and his life and his talisman come to an
end together.

One would say that such a piece of integument was hardly a desirable
possession. And yet, how many of us have at this very moment a peau de
chagrin of our own, diminishing with every costly wish indulged, and
incapable, like the magical one of the story, of being arrested in its
progress.

Need I say that I refer to those coupon bonds, issued in the days of
eight and ten per cent interest, and gradually narrowing as they drop
their semiannual slips of paper, which represent wishes to be realized,
as the roses let fall their leaves in July, as the icicles melt away in
the thaw of January?

How beautiful was the coupon bond, arrayed in its golden raiment of
promises to pay at certain stated intervals, for a goodly number of
coming years! What annual the horticulturist can show will bear
comparison with this product of auricultural industry, which has flowered
in midsummer and midwinter for twenty successive seasons? And now the
last of its blossoms is to be plucked, and the bare stem, stripped of its
ever maturing and always welcome appendages, is reduced to the narrowest
conditions of reproductive existence. Such is the fate of the financial
peau de chagrin. Pity the poor fractional capitalist, who has just
managed to live on the eight per cent of his coupon bonds. The shears of
Atropos were not more fatal to human life than the long scissors which
cut the last coupon to the lean proprietor, whose slice of dry toast it
served to flatter with oleomargarine. Do you wonder that my thoughts
took the poetical form, in the contemplation of these changes and their
melancholy consequences? If the entire poem, of several hundred lines,
was "declined with thanks" by an unfeeling editor, that is no reason why
you should not hear a verse or two of it.

     THE PEAU DE CHAGRIN OF STATE STREET.

        How beauteous is the bond
        In the manifold array
        Of its promises to pay,
        While the eight per cent it gives
        And the rate at which one lives
          Correspond!

        But at last the bough is bare
        Where the coupons one by one
        Through their ripening days have run,
        And the bond, a beggar now,
        Seeks investment anyhow,
          Anywhere!

The Mistress commonly contents herself with the general supervision of
the company, only now and then taking an active part in the conversation.
She started a question the other evening which set some of us thinking.

"Why is it," she said, "that there is so common and so intense a desire
for poetical reputation? It seems to me that, if I were a man, I had
rather have done something worth telling of than make verses about what
other people had done."

"You agree with Alexander the Great," said the Professor. "You would
prefer the fame of Achilles to that of Homer, who told the story of his
wrath and its direful consequences. I am afraid that I should hardly
agree with you. Achilles was little better than a Choctaw brave. I
won't quote Horace's line which characterizes him so admirably, for I
will take it for granted that you all know it. He was a gentleman,--so
is a first-class Indian,--a very noble gentleman in point of courage,
lofty bearing, courtesy, but an unsoaped, ill-clad, turbulent,
high-tempered young fellow, looked up to by his crowd very much as the
champion of the heavy weights is looked up to by his gang of blackguards.
Alexander himself was not much better,--a foolish, fiery young madcap.
How often is he mentioned except as a warning? His best record is that
he served to point a moral as 'Macedonian's madman.' He made a figure,
it is true, in Dryden's great Ode, but what kind of a figure? He got
drunk,--in very bad company, too,--and then turned fire-bug. He had one
redeeming point,--he did value his Homer, and slept with the Iliad under
his pillow. A poet like Homer seems to me worth a dozen such fellows as
Achilles and Alexander."

"Homer is all very well far those that can read him," said Number Seven,
"but the fellows that tag verses together nowadays are mostly fools.
That's my opinion. I wrote some verses once myself, but I had been sick
and was very weak; hadn't strength enough to write in prose, I suppose."

This aggressive remark caused a little stir at our tea-table. For you
must know, if I have not told you already, there are suspicions that we
have more than one "poet" at our table. I have already confessed that I
do myself indulge in verse now and then, and have given my readers a
specimen of my work in that line. But there is so much difference of
character in the verses which are produced at our table, without any
signature, that I feel quite sure there are at least two or three other
contributors besides myself. There is a tall, old-fashioned silver urn,
a sugar-bowl of the period of the Empire, in which the poems sent to be
read are placed by unseen hands. When the proper moment arrives, I lift
the cover of the urn and take out any manuscript it may contain. If
conversation is going on and the company are in a talking mood, I replace
the manuscript or manuscripts, clap on the cover, and wait until there is
a moment's quiet before taking it off again. I might guess the writers
sometimes by the handwriting, but there is more trouble taken to disguise
the chirography than I choose to take to identify it as that of any
particular member of our company.

The turn the conversation took, especially the slashing onslaught of
Number Seven on the writers of verse, set me thinking and talking about
the matter. Number Five turned on the stream of my discourse by a
question.

"You receive a good many volumes of verse, do you not?" she said, with a
look which implied that she knew I did.

I certainly do, I answered. My table aches with them. My shelves groan
with them. Think of what a fuss Pope made about his trials, when he
complained that

     "All Bedlam or Parnassus is let out"!

What were the numbers of the

     "Mob of gentlemen who wrote with ease"

to that great multitude of contributors to our magazines, and authors of
little volumes--sometimes, alas! big ones--of verse, which pour out of
the press, not weekly, but daily, and at such a rate of increase that it
seems as if before long every hour would bring a book, or at least an
article which is to grow into a book by and by?

I thanked Heaven, the other day, that I was not a critic. These
attenuated volumes of poetry in fancy bindings open their covers at one
like so many little unfledged birds, and one does so long to drop a worm
in,--a worm in the shape of a kind word for the poor fledgling! But what
a desperate business it is to deal with this army of candidates for
immortality! I have often had something to say about them, and I may be
saying over the same things; but if I do not remember what I have said,
it is not very likely that my reader will; if he does, he will find, I am
very sure, that I say it a little differently.

What astonishes me is that this enormous mass of commonplace verse, which
burdens the postman who brings it, which it is a serious task only to get
out of its wrappers and open in two or three places, is on the whole of
so good an average quality. The dead level of mediocrity is in these
days a table-land, a good deal above the old sea-level of laboring
incapacity. Sixty years ago verses made a local reputation, which
verses, if offered today to any of our first-class magazines, would go
straight into the waste-basket. To write "poetry" was an art and mystery
in which only a few noted men and a woman or two were experts.

When "Potter the ventriloquist," the predecessor of the well-remembered
Signor Blitz, went round giving his entertainments, there was something
unexplained, uncanny, almost awful, and beyond dispute marvellous, in his
performances. Those watches that disappeared and came back to their
owners, those endless supplies of treasures from empty hats, and
especially those crawling eggs that travelled all over the magician's
person, sent many a child home thinking that Mr. Potter must have ghostly
assistants, and raised grave doubts in the minds of "professors," that is
members of the church, whether they had not compromised their characters
by being seen at such an unhallowed exhibition. Nowadays, a clever boy
who has made a study of parlor magic can do many of those tricks almost
as well as the great sorcerer himself. How simple it all seems when we
have seen the mechanism of the deception!

It is just so with writing in verse. It was not understood that
everybody can learn to make poetry, just as they can learn the more
difficult tricks of juggling. M. Jourdain's discovery that he had been
speaking and writing prose all his life is nothing to that of the man who
finds out in middle life, or even later, that he might have been writing
poetry all his days, if he had only known how perfectly easy and simple
it is. Not everybody, it is true, has a sufficiently good ear, a
sufficient knowledge of rhymes and capacity for handling them, to be what
is called a poet. I doubt whether more than nine out of ten, in the
average, have that combination of gifts required for the writing of
readable verse.

This last expression of opinion created a sensation among The Teacups.
They looked puzzled for a minute. One whispered to the next Teacup,
"More than nine out of ten! I should think that was a pretty liberal
allowance."

Yes, I continued; perhaps ninety-nine in a hundred would come nearer to
the mark. I have sometimes thought I might consider it worth while to
set up a school for instruction in the art. "Poetry taught in twelve
lessons." Congenital idiocy is no disqualification. Anybody can write
"poetry." It is a most unenviable distinction to leave published a thin
volume of verse, which nobody wanted, nobody buys, nobody reads, nobody
cares for except the author, who cries over its pathos, poor fellow, and
revels in its beauties, which he has all to himself. Come! who will be
my pupils in a Course,--Poetry taught in twelve lessons? That made a
laugh, in which most of The Teacups, myself included, joined heartily.
Through it all I heard the sweet tones of Number Five's caressing voice;
not because it was more penetrating or louder than the others, for it was
low and soft, but it was so different from the others, there was so much
more life,--the life of sweet womanhood,--dissolved in it.

(Of course he will fall in love with her. "He? Who?" Why, the
newcomer, the Counsellor. Did I not see his eyes turn toward her as the
silvery notes rippled from her throat? Did they not follow her in her
movements, as she turned her tread this or that way?

--What nonsense for me to be arranging matters between two people
strangers to each other before to-day!)

"A fellow writes in verse when he has nothing to say, and feels too dull
and silly to say it in prose," said Number Seven.

This made us laugh again, good-naturedly. I was pleased with a kind of
truth which it seemed to me to wrap up in its rather startling
affirmation. I gave a piece of advice the other day which I said I
thought deserved a paragraph to itself. It was from a letter I wrote not
long ago to an unknown young correspondent, who had a longing for seeing
himself in verse but was not hopelessly infatuated with the idea that he
was born a "poet." "When you write in prose," I said, "you say what you
mean. When you write in verse you say what you must." I was thinking
more especially of rhymed verse. Rhythm alone is a tether, and not a
very long one. But rhymes are iron fetters; it is dragging a chain and
ball to march under their incumbrance; it is a clog-dance you are
figuring in, when you execute your metrical pas seul. Consider under
what a disadvantage your thinking powers are laboring when you are
handicapped by the inexorable demands of our scanty English rhyming
vocabulary! You want to say something about the heavenly bodies, and you
have a beautiful line ending with the word stars. Were you writing in
prose, your imagination, your fancy, your rhetoric, your musical ear for
the harmonies of language, would all have full play. But there is your
rhyme fastening you by the leg, and you must either reject the line which
pleases you, or you must whip your hobbling fancy and all your limping
thoughts into the traces which are hitched to one of three or four or
half a dozen serviceable words. You cannot make any use of cars, I will
suppose; you have no occasion to talk about scars; "the red planet Mars"
has been used already; Dibdin has said enough about the gallant tars;
what is there left for you but bars? So you give up your trains of
thought, capitulate to necessity, and manage to lug in some kind of
allusion, in place or out of place, which will allow you to make use of
bars. Can there be imagined a more certain process for breaking up all
continuity of thought, for taking out all the vigor, all the virility,
which belongs to natural prose as the vehicle of strong, graceful,
spontaneous thought, than this miserable subjugation of intellect to
the-clink of well or ill matched syllables? I think you will smile if I
tell you of an idea I have had about teaching the art of writing "poems"
to the half-witted children at the Idiot Asylum. The trick of rhyming
cannot be more usefully employed than in furnishing a pleasant amusement
to the poor feeble-minded children. I should feel that I was well
employed in getting up a Primer for the pupils of the Asylum, and other
young persons who are incapable of serious thought and connected
expression. I would start in the simplest way; thus:--

     When darkness veils the evening....
     I love to close my weary....

The pupil begins by supplying the missing words, which most children who
are able to keep out of fire and water can accomplish after a certain
number of trials. When the poet that is to be has got so as to perform
this task easily, a skeleton verse, in which two or three words of each
line are omitted, is given the child to fill up. By and by the more
difficult forms of metre are outlined, until at length a feebleminded
child can make out a sonnet, completely equipped with its four pairs of
rhymes in the first section and its three pairs in the second part.

Number Seven interrupted my discourse somewhat abruptly, as is his wont;
for we grant him a license, in virtue of his eccentricity, which we
should hardly expect to be claimed by a perfectly sound Teacup.

"That's the way,--that 's the way!" exclaimed he. "It's just the same
thing as my plan for teaching drawing."

Some curiosity was shown among The Teacups to know what the queer
creature had got into his mind, and Number Five asked him, in her
irresistible tones, if he wouldn't oblige us by telling us all about it.

He looked at her a moment without speaking. I suppose he has often been
made fun of,--slighted in conversation, taken as a butt for people who
thought themselves witty, made to feel as we may suppose a cracked piece
of china-ware feels when it is clinked in the company of sound bits of
porcelain. I never saw him when he was carelessly dealt with in
conversation,--for it would sometimes happen, even at our table,--without
recalling some lines of Emerson which always struck me as of wonderful
force and almost terrible truthfulness:--

     "Alas! that one is born in blight,
     Victim of perpetual slight
     When thou lookest in his face
     Thy heart saith, 'Brother, go thy ways
     None shall ask thee what thou doest,
     Or care a rush for what thou knowest,
     Or listen when thou repliest,
     Or remember where thou liest,
     Or how thy supper is sodden;'
     And another is born
     To make the sun forgotten."

Poor fellow! Number Seven has to bear a good deal in the way of neglect
and ridicule, I do not doubt. Happily, he is protected by an amount of
belief in himself which shields him from many assailants who would
torture a more sensitive nature. But the sweet voice of Number Five and
her sincere way of addressing him seemed to touch his feelings. That was
the meaning of his momentary silence, in which I saw that his eyes
glistened and a faint flush rose on his cheeks. In a moment, however, as
soon as he was on his hobby, he was all right, and explained his new and
ingenious system as follows:

"A man at a certain distance appears as a dark spot,--nothing more. Good.
Anybody, man, woman, or child, can make a dot, say a period, such as we
use in writing. Lesson No. 1. Make a dot; that is, draw your man, a
mile off, if that is far enough. Now make him come a little nearer, a
few rods, say. The dot is an oblong figure now. Good. Let your scholar
draw the oblong figure. It is as easy as it is to make a note of
admiration. Your man comes nearer, and now some hint of a bulbous
enlargement at one end, and perhaps of lateral appendages and a
bifurcation, begins to show itself. The pupil sets down with his pencil
just what he sees,--no more. So by degrees the man who serves as model
approaches. A bright pupil will learn to get the outline of a human
figure in ten lessons, the model coming five hundred feet nearer each
time. A dull one may require fifty, the model beginning a mile off, or
more, and coming a hundred feet nearer at each move."

The company were amused by all this, but could not help seeing that there
was a certain practical possibility about the scheme. Our two Annexes,
as we call then, appeared to be interested in the project, or fancy, or
whim, or whatever the older heads might consider it. "I guess I'll try
it," said the American Annex. "Quite so," answered the English Annex.
Why the first girl "guessed" about her own intentions it is hard to say.
What "quite so" referred to it would not be easy to determine. But these
two expressions would decide the nationality of our two young ladies if
we met them on the top of the great Pyramid.

I was very glad that Number Seven had interrupted me. In fact, it is a
good thing once in a while to break in upon the monotony of a steady
talker at a dinner-table, tea-table, or any other place of social
converse. The best talker is liable to become the most formidable of
bores. It is a peculiarity of the bore that he is the last person to
find himself out. Many a terebrant I have known who, in that capacity,
to borrow a line from Coleridge,

     "Was great, nor knew how great he was."

A line, by the way, which, as I have remarked, has in it a germ like that
famous "He builded better than he knew" of Emerson.

There was a slight lull in the conversation. The Mistress, who keeps an
eye on the course of things, and feared that one of those panic silences
was impending, in which everybody wants to say something and does not
know just what to say, begged me to go on with my remarks about the
"manufacture" of "poetry."

You use the right term, madam, I said. The manufacture of that article
has become an extensive and therefore an important branch of industry.
One must be an editor, which I am not, or a literary confidant of a wide
circle of correspondents, which I am, to have any idea of the enormous
output of verse which is characteristic of our time. There are many
curious facts connected with this phenomenon. Educated people--yes, and
many who are not educated--have discovered that rhymes are not the
private property of a few noted writers who, having squatted on that part
of the literary domain some twenty or forty or sixty years ago, have, as
it were, fenced it in with their touchy, barbed-wire reputations, and
have come to regard it and cause it to be regarded as their private
property. The discovery having been made that rhyme is not a paddock for
this or that race-horse, but a common, where every colt, pony, and donkey
can range at will; a vast irruption into that once-privileged inclosure
has taken place. The study of the great invasion is interesting.

Poetry is commonly thought to be the language of emotion. On the
contrary, most of what is so called proves the absence of all passionate
excitement. It is a cold-blooded, haggard, anxious, worrying hunt after
rhymes which can be made serviceable, after images which will be
effective, after phrases which are sonorous; all this under limitations
which restrict the natural movements of fancy and imagination. There is
a secondary excitement in overcoming the difficulties of rhythm and
rhyme, no doubt, but this is not the emotional heat excited by the
subject of the "poet's" treatment. True poetry, the best of it, is but
the ashes of a burnt-out passion. The flame was in the eye and in the
cheek, the coals may be still burning in the heart, but when we come to
the words it leaves behind it, a little warmth, a cinder or two just
glimmering under the dead gray ashes,--that is all we can look for. When
it comes to the manufactured article, one is surprised to find how well
the metrical artisans have learned to imitate the real thing. They catch
all the phrases of the true poet. They imitate his metrical forms as a
mimic copies the gait of the person he is representing.

Now I am not going to abuse "these same metre ballad-mongers," for the
obvious reason that, as all The Teacups know, I myself belong to the
fraternity. I don't think that this reason should hinder my having my
say about the ballad-mongering business. For the last thirty years I
have been in the habit of receiving a volume of poems or a poem, printed
or manuscript--I will not say daily, though I sometimes receive more than
one in a day, but at very short intervals. I have been consulted by
hundreds of writers of verse as to the merit of their performances, and
have often advised the writers to the best of my ability. Of late I have
found it impossible to attempt to read critically all the literary
productions, in verse and in prose, which have heaped themselves on every
exposed surface of my library, like snowdrifts along the railroad
tracks,--blocking my literary pathway, so that I can hardly find my daily
papers.

What is the meaning of this rush into rhyming of such a multitude of
people, of all ages, from the infant phenomenon to the oldest inhabitant?

Many of my young correspondents have told me in so many words, "I want to
be famous." Now it is true that of all the short cuts to fame, in time
of peace, there is none shorter than the road paved with rhymes. Byron
woke up one morning and found himself famous. Still more notably did
Rouget de l'Isle fill the air of France, nay, the whole atmosphere of
freedom all the world over, with his name wafted on the wings of the
Marseillaise, the work of a single night. But if by fame the aspirant
means having his name brought before and kept before the public, there is
a much cheaper way of acquiring that kind of notoriety. Have your
portrait taken as a "Wonderful Cure of a Desperate Disease given up by
all the Doctors." You will get a fair likeness of yourself and a partial
biographical notice, and have the satisfaction, if not of promoting the
welfare of the community, at least that of advancing the financial
interests of the benefactor whose enterprise has given you your coveted
notoriety. If a man wants to be famous, he had much better try the
advertising doctor than the terrible editor, whose waste-basket is a maw
which is as insatiable as the temporary stomach of Jack the Giant-killer.

"You must not talk so," said Number Five. "I know you don't mean any
wrong to the true poets, but you might be thought to hold them cheap,
whereas you value the gift in others,--in yourself too, I rather think.
There are a great many women,--and some men,--who write in verse from a
natural instinct which leads them to that form of expression. If you
could peep into the portfolio of all the cultivated women among your
acquaintances, you would be surprised, I believe, to see how many of them
trust their thoughts and feelings to verse which they never think of
publishing, and much of which never meets any eyes but their own. Don't
be cruel to the sensitive natures who find a music in the harmonies of
rhythm and rhyme which soothes their own souls, if it reaches no
farther."

I was glad that Number Five spoke up as she did. Her generous instinct
came to the rescue of the poor poets just at the right moment. Not that
I meant to deal roughly with them, but the "poets" I have been forced
into relation with have impressed me with certain convictions which are
not flattering to the fraternity, and if my judgments are not accompanied
by my own qualifications, distinctions, and exceptions, they may seem
harsh to many readers.

Let me draw a picture which many a young man and woman, and some no
longer young, will recognize as the story of their own experiences.

--He is sitting alone with his own thoughts and memories. What is that
book he is holding? Something precious, evidently, for it is bound in
"tree calf," and there is gilding enough about it for a birthday present.
The reader seems to be deeply absorbed in its contents, and at times
greatly excited by what he reads; for his face is flushed, his eyes
glitter, and--there rolls a large tear down his cheek. Listen to him; he
is reading aloud in impassioned tones:

   And have I coined my soul in words for naught?
   And must I, with the dim, forgotten throng
   Of silent ghosts that left no earthly trace
   To show they once had breathed this vital air,
   Die out, of mortal memories?

His voice is choked by his emotion. "How is it possible," he says to
himself, "that any one can read my 'Gaspings for Immortality' without
being impressed by their freshness, their passion, their beauty, their
originality?" Tears come to his relief freely,--so freely that he has
to push the precious volume out of the range of their blistering shower.
Six years ago "Gaspings for Immortality" was published, advertised,
praised by the professionals whose business it is to boost their
publishers' authors. A week and more it was seen on the counters of the
booksellers and at the stalls in the railroad stations. Then it
disappeared from public view. A few copies still kept their place on the
shelves of friends,--presentation copies, of course, as there is no
evidence that any were disposed of by sale; and now, one might as well
ask for the lost books of Livy as inquire at a bookstore for "Gaspings
for Immortality."

The authors of these poems are all round us, men and women, and no one
with a fair amount of human sympathy in his disposition would treat them
otherwise than tenderly. Perhaps they do not need tender treatment. How
do you know that posterity may not resuscitate these seemingly dead
poems, and give their author the immortality for which he longed and
labored? It is not every poet who is at once appreciated. Some will
tell you that the best poets never are. Who can say that you, dear
unappreciated brother or sister, are not one of those whom it is left for
after times to discover among the wrecks of the past, and hold up to the
admiration of the world?

I have not thought it necessary to put in all the interpellations, as the
French call them, which broke the course of this somewhat extended series
of remarks; but the comments of some of The Teacups helped me to shape
certain additional observations, and may seem to the reader as of more
significance than what I had been saying.

Number Seven saw nothing but the folly and weakness of the "rhyming
cranks," as he called them. He thought the fellow that I had described
as blubbering over his still-born poems would have been better occupied
in earning his living in some honest way or other. He knew one chap that
published a volume of verses, and let his wife bring up the wood for the
fire by which he was writing. A fellow says, "I am a poet!" and he
thinks himself different from common folks. He ought to be excused from
military service. He might be killed, and the world would lose the
inestimable products of his genius. "I believe some of 'em think," said
Number Seven, "that they ought not to be called upon to pay their taxes
and their bills for household expenses, like the rest of us."

"If they would only study and take to heart Horace's 'Ars Poetica,'" said
the Professor, "it would be a great benefit to them and to the world at
large. I would not advise you to follow him too literally, of course,
for, as you will see, the changes that have taken place since his time
would make some of his precepts useless and some dangerous, but the
spirit of them is always instructive. This is the way, somewhat
modernized and accompanied by my running commentary, in which he counsels
a young poet:

"'Don't try to write poetry, my boy, when you are not in the mood for
doing it,--when it goes against the grain. You are a fellow of
sense,--you understand all that.

"'If you have written anything which you think well of, show it to
Mr.______ , the well-known critic; to "the governor," as you call
him,--your honored father; and to me, your friend.'

"To the critic is well enough, if you like to be overhauled and put out
of conceit with yourself,--it may do you good; but I wouldn't go to 'the
governor' with my verses, if I were you. For either he will think what
you have written is something wonderful, almost as good as he could have
written himself,--in fact, he always did believe in hereditary
genius,--or he will pooh-pooh the whole rhyming nonsense, and tell you
that you had a great deal better stick to your business, and leave all
the word-jingling to Mother Goose and her followers.

"'Show me your verses,' says Horace. Very good it was in him, and mighty
encouraging the first counsel he gives! 'Keep your poem to yourself for
some eight or ten years; you will have time to look it over, to correct
it and make it fit to present to the public.'

"'Much obliged for your advice,' says the poor poet, thirsting for a
draught of fame, and offered a handful of dust. And off he hurries to
the printer, to be sure that his poem comes out in the next number of the
magazine he writes for."

"Is not poetry the natural language of lovers?"

It was the Tutor who asked this question, and I thought he looked in the
direction of Number Five, as if she might answer his question. But Number
Five stirred her tea devotedly; there was a lump of sugar, I suppose,
that acted like a piece of marble. So there was a silence while the lump
was slowly dissolving, and it was anybody's chance who saw fit to take up
the conversation.

The voice that broke the silence was not the sweet, winsome one we were
listening for, but it instantly arrested the attention of the company.
It was the grave, manly voice of one used to speaking, and accustomed to
be listened to with deference. This was the first time that the company
as a whole had heard it, for the speaker was the new-comer who has been
repeatedly alluded to,--the one of whom I spoke as "the Counsellor."

"I think I can tell you something about that," said the Counsellor. "I
suppose you will wonder how a man of my profession can know or interest
himself about a question so remote from his arid pursuits. And yet there
is hardly one man in a thousand who knows from actual experience a
fraction of what I have learned of the lovers' vocabulary in my
professional experience. I have, I am sorry to say, had to take an
important part in a great number of divorce cases. These have brought
before me scores and hundreds of letters, in which every shade of the
great passion has been represented. What has most struck me in these
amatory correspondences has been their remarkable sameness. It seems as
if writing love-letters reduced all sorts of people to the same level. I
don't remember whether Lord Bacon has left us anything in that
line,--unless, indeed, he wrote Romeo and Juliet' and the 'Sonnets;' but
if he has, I don't believe they differ so very much from those of his
valet or his groom to their respective lady-loves. It is always, My
darling! my darling! The words of endearment are the only ones the lover
wants to employ, and he finds the vocabulary too limited for his vast
desires. So his letters are apt to be rather tedious except to the
personage to whom they are addressed. As to poetry, it is very common to
find it in love-letters, especially in those that have no love in them.
The letters of bigamists and polygamists are rich in poetical extracts.
Occasionally, an original spurt in rhyme adds variety to an otherwise
monotonous performance. I don't think there is much passion in men's
poetry addressed to women. I agree with The Dictator that poetry is
little more than the ashes of passion; still it may show that the flame
has had its sweep where you find it, unless, indeed, it is shoveled in
from another man's fireplace."

"What do you say to the love poetry of women?" asked the Professor. "Did
ever passion heat words to incandescence as it did those of Sappho?"

The Counsellor turned,--not to Number Five, as he ought to have done,
according to my programme, but to the Mistress.

"Madam," he said, "your sex is adorable in many ways, but in the abandon
of a genuine love-letter it is incomparable. I have seen a string of
women's love-letters, in which the creature enlaced herself about the
object of her worship as that South American parasite which clasps the
tree to which it has attached itself, begins with a slender succulent
network, feeds on the trunk, spreads its fingers out to hold firmly to
one branch after another, thickens, hardens, stretches in every
direction, following the boughs,--and at length gets strong enough to
hold in its murderous arms, high up in air, the stump and shaft of the
once sturdy growth that was its support and subsistence."

The Counsellor did not say all this quite so formally as I have set it
down here, but in a much easier way. In fact, it is impossible to smooth
out a conversation from memory without stiffening it; you can't have a
dress shirt look quite right without starching the bosom.

Some of us would have liked to hear more about those letters in the
divorce cases, but the Counsellor had to leave the table. He promised to
show us some pictures he has of the South American parasite. I have seen
them, and I can assure you they are very curious.

The following verses were found in the urn, or sugar-bowl.

          CACOETHES SCRIBENDI.

     If all the trees in all the woods were men,
     And each and every blade of grass a pen;
     If every leaf on every shrub and tree
     Turned to a sheet of foolscap; every sea
     Were changed to ink, and all earth's living tribes
     Had nothing else to do but act as scribes,
     And for ten thousand ages, day and night,
     The human race should write, and write, and write,
     Till all the pens and paper were used up,
     And the huge inkstand was an empty cup,
     Still would the scribblers clustered round its brim
     Call for more pens, more paper, and more ink.




V

"Dolce, ma non troppo dolce," said the Professor to the Mistress, who was
sweetening his tea. She always sweetens his and mine for us. He has
been attending a series of concerts, and borrowed the form of the
directions to the orchestra. "Sweet, but not too sweet," he said,
translating the Italian for the benefit of any of the company who might
not be linguists or musical experts.

"Do you go to those musical hullabaloos?" called out Number Seven. There
was something very much like rudeness in this question and the tone in
which it was asked. But we are used to the outbursts, and extravagances,
and oddities of Number Seven, and do not take offence at his rough
speeches as we should if any other of the company uttered them.

"If you mean the concerts that have been going on this season, yes, I
do," said the Professor, in a bland, good-humored way.

"And do you take real pleasure in the din of all those screeching and
banging and growling instruments?"

"Yes," he answered, modestly, "I enjoy the brouhaha, if you choose to
consider it such, of all this quarrelsome menagerie of noise-making
machines, brought into order and harmony by the presiding genius, the
leader, who has made a happy family of these snarling stringed
instruments and whining wind instruments, so that although

     "Linguae centum sent, oraque centum,

"notwithstanding there are a hundred vibrating tongues and a hundred
bellowing mouths, their one grand blended and harmonized uproar sets all
my fibres tingling with a not unpleasing tremor."

"Do you understand it? Do you take any idea from it? Do you know what
it all means?" said Number Seven.

The Professor was long-suffering under this series of somewhat peremptory
questions. He replied very placidly, "I am afraid I have but a
superficial outside acquaintance with the secrets, the unfathomable
mysteries, of music. I can no more conceive of the working conditions of
the great composer,

     "'Untwisting all the chains that tie
     The hidden soul of harmony,'

"than a child of three years can follow the reasonings of Newton's
'Principia.' I do not even pretend that I can appreciate the work of a
great master as a born and trained musician does. Still, I do love a
great crash of harmonies, and the oftener I listen to these musical
tempests the higher my soul seems to ride upon them, as the wild fowl I
see through my window soar more freely and fearlessly the fiercer the
storm with which they battle."

"That's all very well," said Number Seven, "but I wish we could get the
old-time music back again. You ought to have heard,--no, I won't mention
her, dead, poor girl,--dead and singing with the saints in heaven,--but
the S_____ girls. If you could have heard them as I did when I was a
boy, you would have cried, as we all used to. Do you cry at those great
musical smashes? How can you cry when you don't know what it is all
about? We used to think the words meant something,--we fancied that
Burns and Moore said some things very prettily. I suppose you've
outgrown all that."

No one can handle Number Seven in one of his tantrums half so well as
Number Five can do it. She can pick out what threads of sense may be
wound off from the tangle of his ideas when they are crowded and
confused, as they are apt to be at times. She can soften the occasional
expression of half-concealed ridicule with which the poor old fellow's
sallies are liable to be welcomed--or unwelcomed. She knows that the
edge of a broken teacup may be sharper, very possibly, than that of a
philosopher's jackknife. A mind a little off its balance, one which has
a slightly squinting brain as its organ; will often prove fertile in
suggestions. Vulgar, cynical, contemptuous listeners fly at all its
weaknesses, and please themselves with making light of its often futile
ingenuities, when a wiser audience would gladly accept a hint which
perhaps could be developed in some profitable direction, or so interpret
an erratic thought that it should prove good sense in disguise. That is
the way Number Five was in the habit of dealing with the explosions of
Number Seven. Do you think she did not see the ridiculous element in a
silly speech, or the absurdity of an outrageously extravagant assertion?
Then you never heard her laugh when she could give way to her sense of
the ludicrous without wounding the feelings of any other person. But her
kind heart never would forget itself, and so Number Seven had a champion
who was always ready to see that his flashes of intelligence, fitful as
they were, and liable to be streaked with half-crazy fancies, always
found one willing recipient of what light there was in them.

Number Five, I have found, is a true lover of music, and has a right to
claim a real knowledge of its higher and deeper mysteries. But she
accepted very cordially what our light-headed companion said about the
songs he used to listen to.

"There is no doubt," she remarked, "that the tears which used to be shed
over 'Oft in the sully night,' or 'Auld Robin Gray,' or 'A place in thy
memory, dearest,' were honest tears, coming from the true sources of
emotion. There was no affectation about them; those songs came home to
the sensibilities of young people,--of all who had any sensibilities to
be acted upon. And on the other hand, there is a great amount of
affectation in the apparent enthusiasm of many persons in admiring and
applauding music of which they have not the least real appreciation.
They do not know whether it is good or bad, the work of a first-rate or a
fifth-rate composer; whether there are coherent elements in it, or
whether it is nothing more than 'a concourse of sweet sounds' with no
organic connections. One must be educated, no doubt, to understand the
more complex and difficult kinds of musical composition. Go to the great
concerts where you know that the music is good, and that you ought to
like it whether you do or not. Take a music-bath once or twice a week
for a few seasons, and you will find that it is to the soul what the
water-bath is to the body. I wouldn't trouble myself about the
affectations of people who go to this or that series of concerts chiefly
because it is fashionable. Some of these people whom we think so silly
and hold so cheap will perhaps find, sooner or later, that they have a
dormant faculty which is at last waking up,--and that they who came
because others came, and began by staring at the audience, are listening
with a newly found delight. Every one of us has a harp under bodice or
waistcoat, and if it can only once get properly strung and tuned it will
respond to all outside harmonies."

The Professor has some ideas about music, which I believe he has given to
the world in one form or another; but the world is growing old and
forgetful, and needs to be reminded now and then of what one has formerly
told it.

"I have had glimpses," the Professor said, "of the conditions into which
music is capable of bringing a sensitive nature. Glimpses, I say,
because I cannot pretend that I am capable of sounding all the depths or
reaching all the heights to which music may transport our mortal
consciousness. Let me remind you of a curious fact with reference to the
seat of the musical sense. Far down below the great masses of thinking
marrow and its secondary agents, just as the brain is about to merge in
the spinal cord, the roots of the nerve of hearing spread their white
filaments out into the sentient matter, where they report what the
external organs of hearing tell them. This sentient matter is in remote
connection only with the mental organs, far more remote than the centres
of the sense of vision and that of smell. In a word, the musical faculty
might be said to have a little brain of its own. It has a special world
and a private language all to itself. How can one explain its
significance to those whose musical faculties are in a rudimentary state
of development, or who have never had them trained? Can you describe in
intelligible language the smell of a rose as compared with that of a
violet? No,--music can be translated only by music. Just so far as it
suggests worded thought, it falls short of its highest office. Pure
emotional movements of the spiritual nature,--that is what I ask of
music. Music will be the universal language,--the Volapuk of spiritual
being."

"Angels sit down with their harps and play at each other, I suppose,"
said Number Seven. "Must have an atmosphere up there if they have harps,
or they wouldn't get any music. Wonder if angels breathe like mortals?
If they do, they must have lungs and air passages, of course. Think of
an angel with the influenza, and nothing but a cloud for a handkerchief!"

--This is a good instance of the way in which Number Seven's squinting
brain works. You will now and then meet just such brains in heads you
know very well. Their owners are much given to asking unanswerable
questions. A physicist may settle it for us whether there is an
atmosphere about a planet or not, but it takes a brain with an extra
fissure in it to ask these unexpected questions,--questions which the
natural philosopher cannot answer, and which the theologian never thinks
of asking.

The company at our table do not keep always in the same places. The
first thing I noticed, the other evening, was that the Tutor was sitting
between the two Annexes, and the Counsellor was next to Number Five.
Something ought to come of this arrangement. One of those two young
ladies must certainly captivate and perhaps capture the Tutor. They are
just the age to be falling in love and to be fallen in love with. The
Tutor is good looking, intellectual, suspected of writing poetry, but a
little shy, it appears to me. I am glad to see him between the two girls.
If there were only one, she might be shy too, and then there would be
less chance for a romance such as I am on the lookout for; but these
young persons lend courage to each other, and between them, if he does
not wake up like Cymon at the sight of Iphigenia, I shall be
disappointed. As for the Counsellor and Number Five, they will soon find
each other out. Yes, it is all pretty clear in my mind,--except that
there is always an x in a problem where sentiments are involved. No, not
so clear about the Tutor. Predestined, I venture my guess, to one or the
other, but to which? I will suspend my opinion for the present.

I have found out that the Counsellor is a childless widower. I am told
that the Tutor is unmarried, and so far as known not engaged. There is no
use in denying it,--a company without the possibility of a love-match
between two of its circle is like a champagne bottle with the cork out
for some hours as compared to one with its pop yet in reserve. However,
if there should be any love-making, it need not break up our
conversations. Most of it will be carried on away from our tea-table.

Some of us have been attending certain lectures on Egypt and its
antiquities. I have never been on the Nile. If in any future state
there shall be vacations in which we may have liberty to revisit our old
home, equipped with a complete brand-new set of mortal senses as our
travelling outfit, I think one of the first places I should go to, after
my birthplace, the old gambrel-roofed house,--the place where it stood,
rather,--would be that mighty, awe-inspiring river. I do not suppose we
shall ever know half of what we owe to the wise and wonderful people who
confront us with the overpowering monuments of a past which flows out of
the unfathomable darkness as the great river streams from sources even as
yet but imperfectly explored.

I have thought a good deal about Egypt, lately, with reference to our
historical monuments. How did the great unknown mastery who fixed the
two leading forms of their monumental records arrive at those admirable
and eternal types, the pyramid and the obelisk? How did they get their
model of the pyramid?

Here is an hour-glass, not inappropriately filled with sand from the
great Egyptian desert. I turn it, and watch the sand as it accumulates
in the lower half of the glass. How symmetrically, how beautifully, how
inevitably, the little particles pile up the cone, which is ever building
and unbuilding itself, always aiming at the stability which is found only
at a certain fixed angle! The Egyptian children playing in the sand must
have noticed this as they let the grains fall from their hands, and the
sloping sides of the miniature pyramid must have been among the familiar
sights to the little boys and girls for whom the sand furnished their
earliest playthings. Nature taught her children through the working of
the laws of gravitation how to build so that her forces should act in
harmony with art, to preserve the integrity of a structure meant to reach
a far-off posterity. The pyramid is only the cone in which Nature
arranges her heaped and sliding fragments; the cone with flattened
Surfaces, as it is prefigured in certain well-known crystalline forms.
The obelisk is from another of Nature's patterns; it is only a gigantic
acicular crystal.

The Egyptians knew what a monument should be, simple, noble, durable. It
seems to me that we Americans might take a lesson from those early
architects. Our cemeteries are crowded with monuments which are very far
from simple, anything but noble, and stand a small chance of being
permanent. The pyramid is rarely seen, perhaps because it takes up so
much room; and when built on a small scale seems insignificant as we
think of it, dwarfed by the vast structures of antiquity. The obelisk is
very common, and when in just proportions and of respectable dimensions
is unobjectionable.

But the gigantic obelisks like that on Bunker Hill, and especially the
Washington monument at the national capital, are open to critical
animadversion. Let us contrast the last mentioned of these great piles
with the obelisk as the Egyptian conceived and executed it. The new
Pharaoh ordered a memorial of some important personage or event. In the
first place, a mighty stone was dislodged from its connections, and
lifted, unbroken, from the quarry. This was a feat from which our modern
stone-workers shrink dismayed. The Egyptians appear to have handled
these huge monoliths as our artisans handle hearthstones and doorsteps,
for the land actually bristled with such giant columns. They were shaped
and finished as nicely as if they were breastpins for the Titans to wear,
and on their polished surfaces were engraved in imperishable characters
the records they were erected to preserve.

Europe and America borrow these noble productions of African art and
power, and find them hard enough to handle after they have succeeded in
transporting them to Rome, or London, or New York. Their simplicity,
grandeur, imperishability, speaking symbolism, shame all the pretentious
and fragile works of human art around them. The obelisk has no joints
for the destructive agencies of nature to attack; the pyramid has no
masses hanging in unstable equilibrium, and threatening to fall by their
own weight in the course of a thousand or two years.

America says the Father of his Country must have a monument worthy of his
exalted place in history. What shall it be? A temple such as Athens
might have been proud to rear upon her Acropolis? An obelisk such as
Thebes might have pointed out with pride to the strangers who found
admission through her hundred gates? After long meditation and the
rejection of the hybrid monstrosities with which the nation was menaced,
an obelisk is at last decided upon. How can it be made grand and
dignified enough to be equal to the office assigned it? We dare not
attempt to carve a single stone from the living rock,--all our modern
appliances fail to make the task as easy to us as it seems to have been
to the early Egyptians. No artistic skill is required in giving a
four-square tapering figure to a stone column. If we cannot shape a
solid obelisk of the proper dimensions, we can build one of separate
blocks. How can we give it the distinction we demand for it? The nation
which can brag that it has "the biggest show on earth" cannot boast a
great deal in the way of architecture, but it can do one thing,--it can
build an obelisk that shall be taller than any structure now standing
which the hand of man has raised. Build an obelisk! How different the
idea of such a structure from that of the unbroken, unjointed prismatic
shaft, one perfect whole, as complete in itself, as fitly shaped and
consolidated to defy the elements, as the towering palm or the tapering
pine! Well, we had the satisfaction for a time of claiming the tallest
structure in the world; and now that the new Tower of Babel which has
sprung up in Paris has killed that pretention, I think we shall feel and
speak more modestly about our stone hyperbole, our materialization of the
American love of the superlative. We have the higher civilization among
us, and we must try to keep down the forth-putting instincts of the
lower. We do not want to see our national monument placarded as "the
greatest show on earth,"--perhaps it is well that it is taken down from
that bad eminence.

I do not think that this speech of mine was very well received. It
appeared to jar somewhat on the nerves of the American Annex. There was
a smile on the lips of the other Annex,--the English girl,--which she
tried to keep quiet, but it was too plain that she enjoyed my diatribe.

It must be remembered that I and the other Teacups, in common with the
rest of our fellow-citizens, have had our sensibilities greatly worked
upon, our patriotism chilled, our local pride outraged, by the
monstrosities which have been allowed to deform our beautiful public
grounds. We have to be very careful in conducting a visitor, say from
his marble-fronted hotel to the City Hall.--Keep pretty straight along
after entering the Garden,--you will not care to inspect the little
figure of the military gentleman to your right.--Yes, the Cochituate
water is drinkable, but I think I would not turn aside to visit that
small fabric which makes believe it is a temple, and is a weak-eyed
fountain feebly weeping over its own insignificance. About that other
stone misfortune, cruelly reminding us of the "Boston Massacre," we will
not discourse; it is not imposing, and is rarely spoken of.

What a mortification to the inhabitants of a city with some hereditary
and contemporary claims to cultivation; which has noble edifices, grand
libraries, educational institutions of the highest grade, an art-gallery
filled with the finest models and rich in paintings and statuary,--a
stately city that stretches both arms across the Charles to clasp the
hands of Harvard, her twin-sister, each lending lustre to the other like
double stars,--what a pity that she should be so disfigured by crude
attempts to adorn her and commemorate her past that her most loving
children blush for her artificial deformities amidst the wealth of her
natural beauties! One hardly knows which to groan over most sadly,--the
tearing down of old monuments, the shelling of the Parthenon, the
overthrow of the pillared temples of Rome, and in a humbler way the
destruction of the old Hancock house, or the erection of monuments which
are to be a perpetual eyesore to ourselves and our descendants.

We got talking on the subject of realism, of which so much has been said
of late.

It seems to me, I said, that the great additions which have been made by
realism to the territory of literature consist largely in swampy,
malarious, ill-smelling patches of soil which had previously been left to
reptiles and vermin. It is perfectly easy to be original by violating
the laws of decency and the canons of good taste. The general consent of
civilized people was supposed to have banished certain subjects from the
conversation of well-bred people and the pages of respectable literature.
There is no subject, or hardly any, which may not be treated of at the
proper time, in the proper place, by the fitting person, for the right
kind of listener or reader. But when the poet or the story-teller
invades the province of the man of science, he is on dangerous ground. I
need say nothing of the blunders he is pretty sure to make. The
imaginative writer is after effects. The scientific man is after truth.
Science is decent, modest; does not try to startle, but to instruct. The
same scenes and objects which outrage every sense of delicacy in the
story teller's highly colored paragraphs can be read without giving
offence in the chaste language of the physiologist or the physician.

There is a very celebrated novel, "Madame Bovary," the work of M.
Flaubert, which is noted for having been the subject of prosecution as an
immoral work. That it has a serious lesson there is no doubt, if one
will drink down to the bottom of the cup. But the honey of sensuous
description is spread so deeply over the surface of the goblet that a
large proportion of its readers never think of its holding anything else.
All the phases of unhallowed passion are described in full detail. That
is what the book is bought and read for, by the great majority of its
purchasers, as all but simpletons very well know. That is what makes it
sell and brought it into the courts of justice. This book is famous for
its realism; in fact, it is recognized as one of the earliest and most
brilliant examples of that modern style of novel which, beginning where
Balzac left off, attempted to do for literature what the photograph has
done for art. For those who take the trouble to drink out of the cup
below the rim of honey, there is a scene where realism is carried to its
extreme,--surpassed in horror by no writer, unless it be the one whose
name must be looked for at the bottom of the alphabet, as if its natural
place were as low down in the dregs of realism as it could find itself.
This is the death-bed scene, where Madame Bovary expires in convulsions.
The author must have visited the hospitals for the purpose of watching
the terrible agonies he was to depict, tramping from one bed to another
until he reached the one where the cries and contortions were the most
frightful. Such a scene he has reproduced. No hospital physician would
have pictured the straggle in such colors. In the same way, that other
realist, M. Zola, has painted a patient suffering from delirium tremens,
the disease known to common speech as "the horrors." In describing this
case he does all that language can do to make it more horrible than the
reality. He gives us, not realism, but super-realism, if such a term
does not contradict itself.

In this matter of the literal reproduction of sights and scenes which our
natural instinct and our better informed taste and judgment teach us to
avoid, art has been far in advance of literature. It is three hundred
years since Joseph Ribera, more commonly known as Spagnoletto, was born
in the province Valencia, in Spain. We had the misfortune of seeing a
painting of his in a collection belonging to one of the French princes,
and exhibited at the Art Museum. It was that of a man performing upon
himself the operation known to the Japanese as hararkiri. Many persons
who looked upon this revolting picture will never get rid of its
remembrance, and will regret the day when their eyes fell upon it. I
should share the offence of the painter if I ventured to describe it.
Ribera was fond of depicting just such odious and frightful subjects.
"Saint Lawrence writhing on his gridiron, Saint Sebastian full of arrows,
were equally a source of delight to him. Even in subjects which had no
such elements of horror he finds the materials for the delectation of his
ferocious pencil; he makes up for the defect by rendering with a brutal
realism deformity and ugliness."

The first great mistake made by the ultra-realists; like Flaubert and
Zola, is, as I have said, their ignoring the line of distinction between
imaginative art and science. We can find realism enough in books of
anatomy, surgery, and medicine. In studying the human figure, we want to
see it clothed with its natural integuments. It is well for the artist
to study the ecorche in the dissecting-room, but we do not want the
Apollo or the Venus to leave their skins behind them when they go into
the gallery for exhibition. Lancisi's figures show us how the great
statues look when divested of their natural covering. It is instructive,
but useful chiefly as a means to aid in the true artistic reproduction of
nature. When the, hospitals are invaded by the novelist, he should learn
something from the physician as well as from the patients. Science
delineates in monochrome. She never uses high tints and strontian lights
to astonish lookers-on. Such scenes as Flaubert and Zola describe would
be reproduced in their essential characters, but not dressed up in
picturesque phrases. That is the first stumbling-block in the way of the
reader of such realistic stories as those to which I have referred.
There are subjects which must be investigated by scientific men which
most educated persons would be glad to know nothing about. When a
realistic writer like Zola surprises his reader into a kind of knowledge
he never thought of wishing for, he sometimes harms him more than he has
any idea of doing. He wants to produce a sensation, and he leaves a
permanent disgust not to be got rid of. Who does not remember odious
images that can never be washed out from the consciousness which they
have stained? A man's vocabulary is terribly retentive of evil words,
and the images they present cling to his memory and will not loose their
hold. One who has had the mischance to soil his mind by reading certain
poems of Swift will never cleanse it to its original whiteness.
Expressions and thoughts of a certain character stain the fibre of the
thinking organ, and in some degree affect the hue of every idea that
passes through the discolored tissues.

This is the gravest accusation to bring against realism, old or recent,
whether in the brutal paintings of Spagnoletto or in the unclean
revelations of Zola. Leave the description of the drains and cesspools
to the hygienic specialist, the painful facts of disease to the
physician, the details of the laundry to the washerwoman. If we are to
have realism in its tedious descriptions of unimportant particulars, let
it be of particulars which do not excite disgust. Such is the description
of the vegetables in Zola's "Ventre de Paris," where, if one wishes to
see the apotheosis of turnips, beets, and cabbages, he can find them
glorified as supremely as if they had been symbols of so many deities;
their forms, their colors, their expression, worked upon until they seem
as if they were made to be looked at and worshipped rather than to be
boiled and eaten.

I am pleased to find a French critic of M. Flaubert expressing ideas with
which many of my own entirely coincide. "The great mistake of the
realists," he says, "is that they profess to tell the truth because they
tell everything. This puerile hunting after details, this cold and
cynical inventory of all the wretched conditions in the midst of which
poor humanity vegetates, not only do not help us to understand it better,
but, on the contrary, the effect on the spectators is a kind of dazzled
confusion mingled with fatigue and disgust. The material truthfulness to
which the school of M. Flaubert more especially pretends misses its aim
in going beyond it. Truth is lost in its own excess."

I return to my thoughts on the relations of imaginative art in all its
forms with science. The subject which in the hands of the scientific
student is handled decorously,--reverently, we might almost say,--becomes
repulsive, shameful, and debasing in the unscrupulous manipulations of
the low-bred man of letters.

I confess that I am a little jealous of certain tendencies in our own
American literature, which led one of the severest and most outspoken of
our satirical fellow-countrymen, no longer living to be called to account
for it, to say; in a moment of bitterness, that the mission of America
was to vulgarize mankind. I myself have sometimes wondered at the
pleasure some Old World critics have professed to find in the most
lawless freaks of New World literature. I have questioned whether their
delight was not like that of the Spartans in the drunken antics of their
Helots. But I suppose I belong to another age, and must not attempt to
judge the present by my old-fashioned standards.

The company listened very civilly to these remarks, whether they agreed
with them or not. I am not sure that I want all the young people to
think just as I do in matters of critical judgment. New wine does not go
well into old bottles, but if an old cask has held good wine, it may
improve a crude juice to stand awhile upon the lees of that which once
filled it.

I thought the company had had about enough of this disquisition. They
listened very decorously, and the Professor, who agrees very well with
me, as I happen to know, in my views on this business of realism, thanked
me for giving them the benefit of my opinion.

The silence that followed was broken by Number Seven's suddenly
exclaiming,--

"I should like to boss creation for a week!"

This expression was an outbreak suggested by some train of thought which
Number Seven had been following while I was discoursing. I do not think
one of the company looked as if he or she were shocked by it as an
irreligious or even profane speech. It is a better way always, in
dealing with one of those squinting brains, to let it follow out its own
thought. It will keep to it for a while; then it will quit the rail, so
to speak, and run to any side-track which may present itself.

"What is the first thing you would do?" asked Number Five in a pleasant,
easy way.

"The first thing? Pick out a few thousand of the best specimens of the
best races, and drown the rest like so many blind puppies."

"Why," said she, "that was tried once, and does not seem to have worked
very well."

"Very likely. You mean Noah's flood, I suppose. More people nowadays,
and a better lot to pick from than Noah had."

"Do tell us whom you would take with you," said Number Five.

"You, if you would go," he answered, and I thought I saw a slight flush
on his cheek. "But I didn't say that I should go aboard the new ark
myself. I am not sure that I should. No, I am pretty sure that I
shouldn't. I don't believe, on the whole, it would pay me to save
myself. I ain't of much account. But I could pick out some that were."

And just now he was saying that he should like to boss the universe! All
this has nothing very wonderful about it. Every one of us is subject to
alternations of overvaluation and undervaluation of ourselves. Do you
not remember soliloquies something like this? "Was there ever such a
senseless, stupid creature as I am? How have I managed to keep so long
out of the idiot asylum? Undertook to write a poem, and stuck fast at
the first verse. Had a call from a friend who had just been round the
world. Did n't ask him one word about what he had seen or heard, but
gave him full details of my private history, I having never been off my
own hearth-rug for more than an hour or two at a time, while he was
circumnavigating and circumrailroading the globe. Yes, if anybody can
claim the title, I am certainly the prize idiot." I am afraid that we
all say such things as this to ourselves at times. Do we not use more
emphatic words than these in our self-depreciation? I cannot say how it
is with others, but my vocabulary of self-reproach and humiliation is so
rich in energetic expressions that I should be sorry to have an
interviewer present at an outburst of one of its raging geysers, its
savage soliloquies. A man is a kind of inverted thermometer, the bulb
uppermost, and the column of self-valuation is all the time going up and
down. Number Seven is very much like other people in this respect,--very
much like you and me.

This train of reflections must not carry me away from Number Seven.

"If I can't get a chance to boss this planet for a week or so," he began
again, "I think I could write its history,--yes, the history of the
world, in less compass than any one who has tried it so far."

"You know Sir Walter Raleigh's 'History of the World,' of course?" said
the Professor.

"More or less,--more or less," said Number Seven prudently. "But I don't
care who has written it before me. I will agree to write the story of
two worlds, this and the next, in such a compact way that you can commit
them both to memory in less time than you can learn the answer to the
first question in the Catechism."

What he had got into his head we could not guess, but there was no little
curiosity to discover the particular bee which was buzzing in his bonnet.
He evidently enjoyed our curiosity, and meant to keep us waiting awhile
before revealing the great secret.

"How many words do you think I shall want?"

It is a formula, I suppose, I said, and I will grant you a hundred words.

"Twenty," said the Professor. "That was more than the wise men of Greece
wanted for their grand utterances."

The two Annexes whispered together, and the American Annex gave their
joint result. One thousand was the number they had fixed on. They were
used to hearing lectures, and could hardly conceive that any subject
could be treated without taking up a good part of an hour.

"Less than ten," said Number Five. "If there are to be more than ten, I
don't believe that Number Seven would think the surprise would be up to
our expectations."

"Guess as much as you like," said Number Seven.

"The answer will keep. I don't mean to say what it is until we are ready
to leave the table." He took a blank card from his pocket-book, wrote
something on it, or appeared, at any rate, to write, and handed it, face
down, to the Mistress. What was on the card will be found near the end
of this paper. I wonder if anybody will be curious enough to look
further along to find out what it was before she reads the next
paragraph?

In the mean time there is a train of thought suggested by Number Seven
and his whims. If you want to know how to account for yourself, study
the characters of your relations. All of our brains squint more or less.
There is not one in a hundred, certainly, that does not sometimes see
things distorted by double refraction, out of plumb or out of focus, or
with colors which do not belong to it, or in some way betraying that the
two halves of the brain are not acting in harmony with each other. You
wonder at the eccentricities of this or that connection of your own.
Watch yourself, and you will find impulses which, but for the restraints
you put upon them, would make you do the same foolish things which you
laugh at in that cousin of yours. I once lived in the same house with
the near relative of a very distinguished person, whose name is still
honored and revered among us. His brain was an active one, like that of
his famous relative, but it was full of random ideas, unconnected trains
of thought, whims, crotchets, erratic suggestions. Knowing him, I could
interpret the mental characteristics of the whole family connection in
the light of its exaggerated peculiarities as exhibited in my odd
fellow-boarder. Squinting brains are a great deal more common than we
should at first sight believe. Here is a great book, a solid octavo of
five hundred pages, full of the vagaries of this class of organizations.
I hope to refer to this work hereafter, but just now I will only say
that, after reading till one is tired the strange fancies of the squarers
of the circle, the inventors of perpetual motion, and the rest of the
moonstruck dreamers, most persons will confess to themselves that they
have had notions as wild, conceptions as extravagant, theories as
baseless, as the least rational of those which are here recorded.

Some day I want to talk about my library. It is such a curious
collection of old and new books, such a mosaic of learning and fancies
and follies, that a glance over it would interest the company. Perhaps I
may hereafter give you a talk abut books, but while I am saying a few
passing words upon the subject the greatest bibliographical event that
ever happened in the book-market of the New World is taking place under
our eyes. Here is Mr. Bernard Quaritch just come from his well-known
habitat, No. 15 Piccadilly, with such a collection of rare, beautiful,
and somewhat expensive volumes as the Western Continent never saw before
on the shelves of a bibliopole.

We bookworms are all of us now and then betrayed into an extravagance.
The keen tradesmen who tempt us are like the fishermen who dangle a
minnow, a frog, or a worm before the perch or pickerel who may be on the
lookout for his breakfast. But Mr. Quaritch comes among us like that
formidable angler of whom it is said,

   His hook he baited with a dragon's tail,
   And sat upon a rock and bobbed for whale.

The two catalogues which herald his coming are themselves interesting
literary documents. One can go out with a few shillings in his pocket,
and venture among the books of the first of these catalogues without
being ashamed to show himself with no larger furnishing of the means for
indulging his tastes,--he will find books enough at comparatively modest
prices. But if one feels very rich, so rich that it requires a good deal
to frighten him, let him take the other catalogue and see how many books
he proposes to add to his library at the prices affixed. Here is a Latin
Psalter with the Canticles, from the press of Fust and Schoeffer, the
second book issued from their press, the second book printed with a date,
that date being 1459. There are only eight copies of this work known to
exist; you can have one of them, if so disposed, and if you have change
enough in your pocket. Twenty-six thousand two hundred and fifty dollars
will make you the happy owner of this precious volume. If this is more
than you want to pay, you can have the Gold Gospels of Henry VIII., on
purple vellum, for about half the money. There are pages on pages of
titles of works any one of which would be a snug little property if
turned into money at its catalogue price.

Why will not our multimillionaires look over this catalogue of Mr.
Quaritch, and detain some of its treasures on this side of the Atlantic
for some of our public libraries? We decant the choicest wines of Europe
into our cellars; we ought to be always decanting the precious treasures
of her libraries and galleries into our own, as we have opportunity and
means. As to the means, there are so many rich people who hardly know
what to do with their money that it is well to suggest to them any new
useful end to which their superfluity may contribute. I am not in
alliance with Mr. Quaritch; in fact, I am afraid of him, for if I stayed
a single hour in his library, where I never was but once, and then for
fifteen minutes only, I should leave it so much poorer than I entered it
that I should be reminded of the picture in the titlepage of Fuller's
'Historie of the Holy Warre,' "We went out full. We returned empty."

--After the teacups were all emptied, the card containing Number Seven's
abridged history of two worlds, this and the next, was handed round.

This was all it held:

After all had looked at it, it was passed back to me. "Let The Dictator
interpret it," they all said.

This is what I announced as my interpretation:

Two worlds, the higher and the lower, separated by the thinnest of
partitions. The lower world is that of questions; the upper world is
that of answers. Endless doubt and unrest here below; wondering,
admiring, adoring certainty above.--Am I not right?

"You are right," answered Number Seven solemnly. "That is my
revelation."

The following poem was found in the sugar-bowl.

I read it to the company. There was much whispering and there were many
conjectures as to its authorship, but every Teacup looked innocent, and
we separated each with his or her private conviction. I had mine, but I
will not mention it.

        THE ROSE AND THE FERN.

   Lady, life's sweetest lesson wouldst thou learn,
   Come thou with me to Love's enchanted bower:
   High overhead the trellised roses burn;
   Beneath thy feet behold the feathery fern,
   A leaf without a flower.

   What though the rose leaves fall? They still are sweet,
   And have been lovely in their beauteous prime,
   While the bare frond seems ever to repeat,
   "For us no bud, no blossom, wakes to greet
   The joyous flowering time!"

   Heed thou the lesson. Life has leaves to tread
   And flowers to cherish; summer round thee glows;
   Wait not till autumn's fading robes are shed,
   But while its petals still are burning red
   Gather life's full-blown rose!




VI

Of course the reading of the poem at the end of the last paper has left a
deep impression. I strongly suspect that something very much like
love-making is going on at our table. A peep under the lid of the
sugar-bowl has shown me that there is another poem ready for the company.
That receptacle is looked upon with an almost tremulous excitement by
more than one of The Teacups. The two Annexes turn towards the mystic
urn as if the lots which were to determine their destiny were shut up in
it. Number Five, quieter, and not betraying more curiosity than belongs
to the sex at all ages, glances at the sugarbowl now and then; looking so
like a clairvoyant, that sometimes I cannot help thinking she must be
one. There is a sly look about that young Doctor's eyes, which might
imply that he knows something about what the silver vessel holds, or is
going to hold. The Tutor naturally falls under suspicion, as he is known
to have written and published poems. I suppose the Professor and myself
have hardly been suspected of writing love-poems; but there is no
telling,--there is no telling. Why may not some one of the lady Teacups
have played the part of a masculine lover? George Sand, George Eliot,
Charles Egbert Craddock, made pretty good men in print. The authoress of
"Jane Eyre" was taken for a man by many persons. Can Number Five be
masquerading in verse? Or is one of the two Annexes the make believe
lover? Or did these girls lay their heads together, and send the poem we
had at our last sitting to puzzle the company? It is certain that the
Mistress did not write the poem. It is evident that Number Seven, who is
so severe in his talk about rhymesters, would not, if he could, make such
a fool of himself as to set up for a "poet." Why should not the
Counsellor fall in love and write verses? A good many lawyers have been
"poets."

Perhaps the next poem, which may be looked for in its proper place, may
help us to form a judgment. We may have several verse-writers among us,
and if so there will be a good opportunity for the exercise of judgment
in distributing their productions among the legitimate claimants. In the
mean time, we must not let the love-making and the song-writing interfere
with the more serious matters which these papers are expected to contain.

Number Seven's compendious and comprehensive symbolism proved suggestive,
as his whimsical notions often do. It always pleases me to take some
hint from anything he says when I can, and carry it out in a direction
not unlike that of his own remark. I reminded the company of his
enigmatical symbol.

You can divide mankind in the same way, I said. Two words, each of two
letters, will serve to distinguish two classes of human beings who
constitute the principal divisions of mankind. Can any of you tell what
those two words are?

"Give me five letters," cried Number Seven, "and I can solve your
problem! F-o-o-l-s,--those five letters will give you the first and
largest half. For the other fraction"--

Oh, but, said I, I restrict you absolutely to two letters. If you are
going to take five, you may as well take twenty or a hundred.

After a few attempts, the company gave it up. The nearest approach to
the correct answer was Number Five's guess of Oh and Ah: Oh signifying
eternal striving after an ideal, which belongs to one kind of nature; and
Ah the satisfaction of the other kind of nature, which rests at ease in
what it has attained.

Good! I said to Number Five, but not the answer I am after. The great
division between human beings is into the Ifs and the Ases.

"Is the last word to be spelt with one or two s's?" asked the young
Doctor.

The company laughed feebly at this question. I answered it soberly. With
one s. There are more foolish people among the Ifs than there are among
the Ases.

The company looked puzzled, and asked for an explanation.

This is the meaning of those two words as I interpret them: If it
were,--if it might be,--if it could be,--if it had been. One portion of
mankind go through life always regretting, always whining, always
imagining. These are the people whose backbones remain cartilaginous all
their lives long, as do those of certain other vertebrate animals,--the
sturgeons, for instance. A good many poets must be classed with this
group of vertebrates.

As it is,--this is the way in which the other class of people look at the
conditions in which they find themselves. They may be optimists or
pessimists, they are very largely optimists,--but, taking things just as
they find them, they adjust the facts to their wishes if they can; and if
they cannot, then they adjust themselves to the facts. I venture to say
that if one should count the Ifs and the Ases in the conversation of his
acquaintances, he would find the more able and important persons among
them--statesmen, generals, men of business--among the Ases, and the
majority of the conspicuous failures among the Ifs. I don't know but
this would be as good a test as that of Gideon,--lapping the water or
taking it up in the hand. I have a poetical friend whose conversation is
starred as thick with ifs as a boiled ham is with cloves. But another
friend of mine, a business man, whom I trust in making my investments,
would not let me meddle with a certain stock which I fancied, because, as
he said, "there are too many ifs in it. As it looks now, I would n't
touch it."

I noticed, the other evening, that some private conversation was going on
between the Counsellor and the two Annexes. There was a mischievous look
about the little group, and I thought they were hatching some plot among
them. I did not hear what the English Annex said, but the American
girl's voice was sharper, and I overheard what sounded to me like, "It is
time to stir up that young Doctor." The Counsellor looked very knowing,
and said that he would find a chance before long. I was rather amused to
see how readily he entered into the project of the young people. The
fact is, the Counsellor is young for his time of life; for he already
betrays some signs of the change referred to in that once familiar street
song, which my friend, the great American surgeon, inquired for at the
music-shops under the title, as he got it from the Italian minstrel,

     "Silva tredi mondi goo."

I saw, soon after this, that the Counsellor was watching his chance to
"stir up the young Doctor."

It does not follow, because our young Doctor's bald spot is slower in
coming than he could have wished, that he has not had time to form many
sound conclusions in the calling to which he has devoted himself
Vesalius, the father of modern descriptive anatomy, published his great
work on that subject before he was thirty. Bichat, the great anatomist
and physiologist, who died near the beginning of this century, published
his treatise, which made a revolution in anatomy and pathology, at about
the same age; dying soon after he had reached the age of thirty. So,
possibly the Counsellor may find that he has "stirred up" a young man
who, can take care of his own head, in case of aggressive movements in
its direction.

"Well, Doctor," the Counsellor began, "how are stocks in the measles
market about these times? Any corner in bronchitis? Any syndicate in
the vaccination business?" All this playfully.

"I can't say how it is with other people's patients; most of my families
are doing very well without my help, at this time."

"Do tell me, Doctor, how many families you own. I have heard it said
that some of our fellow-citizens have two distinct families, but you
speak as if you had a dozen."

"I have, but not so large a number as I should like. I could take care
of fifteen or twenty more without: having to work too hard."

"Why, Doctor, you are as bad as a Mormon. What do you mean by calling
certain families yours?"

"Don't you speak about my client? Don't your clients call you their
lawyer? Does n't your baker, does n't your butcher, speak of the
families he supplies as his families?"

To be sure, yes, of course they do; but I had a notion that a man had as
many doctors as he had organs to be doctored."

"Well, there is some truth in that; but did you think the old-fashioned
family doctor was extinct, a fossil like the megatherium?"

"Why, yes, after the recent experience of a friend of mine, I did begin
to think that there would soon be no such personage left as that same
old-fashioned family doctor. Shall I tell you what that experience was?"

The young Doctor said he should be mightily pleased to hear it. He was
going to be one of those old-fogy practitioners himself.

"I don't know," the Counsellor said, "whether my friend got all the
professional terms of his story correctly, nor whether I have got them
from him without making any mistakes; but if I do make blunders in some
of the queer names, you can correct me. This is my friend's story:

"My family doctor," he said, "was a very sensible man, educated at a
school where they professed to teach all the specialties, but not
confining himself to any one branch of medical practice. Surgical
practice he did not profess to meddle with, and there were some classes
of patients whom he was willing to leave to the female physician. But
throughout the range of diseases not requiring exceptionally skilled
manual interference, his education had authorized him to consider
himself, and he did consider himself, qualified to undertake the
treatment of all ordinary cases--It so happened that my young wife was
one of those uneasy persons who are never long contented with their
habitual comforts and blessings, but always trying to find something a
little better, something newer, at any rate. I was getting to be near
fifty years old, and it happened to me, as it not rarely does to people
at about that time of life, that my hair began to fall out. I spoke of
it to my doctor, who smiled, said it was a part of the process of
reversed evolution, but might be retarded a little, and gave me a
prescription. I did not find any great effect from it, and my wife would
have me go to a noted dermatologist. The distinguished specialist
examined my denuded scalp with great care. He looked at it through a
strong magnifier. He examined the bulb of a fallen hair in a powerful
microscope. He deliberated for a while, and then said, "This is a case
of alopecia. It may perhaps be partially remedied. I will give you a
prescription." Which he did, and told me to call again in a fortnight.
At the end of three months I had called six times, and each time got a
new recipe, and detected no difference in the course of my "alopecia."
After I had got through my treatment, I showed my recipes to my family
physician; and we found that three of them were the same he had used,
familiar, old-fashioned remedies, and the others were taken from a list
of new and little-tried prescriptions mentioned in one of the last
medical journals, which was lying on the old doctor's table. I might as
well have got no better under his charge, and should have got off much
cheaper.

"The next trouble I had was a little redness of the eyes, for which my
doctor gave me a wash; but my wife would have it that I must see an
oculist. So I made four visits to an oculist, and at the last visit the
redness was nearly gone,--as it ought to have been by that time. The
specialist called my complaint conjunctivitis, but that did not make it
feel any better nor get well any quicker. If I had had a cataract or any
grave disease of the eye, requiring a nice operation on that delicate
organ, of course I should have properly sought the aid of an expert,
whose eye, hand, and judgment were trained to that special business; but
in this case I don't doubt that my family doctor would have done just as
well as the expert. However, I had to obey orders, and my wife would have
it that I should entrust my precious person only to the most skilful
specialist in each department of medical practice.

"In the course of the year I experienced a variety of slight
indispositions. For these I was auriscoped by an aurist, laryngoscoped
by a laryngologist, ausculted by a stethoscopist, and so on, until a
complete inventory of my organs was made out, and I found that if I
believed all these searching inquirers professed to have detected in my
unfortunate person, I could repeat with too literal truth the words of
the General Confession, "And there is no health in us." I never heard so
many hard names in all my life. I proved to be the subject of a long
catalogue of diseases, and what maladies I was not manifestly guilty of I
was at least suspected of harboring. I was handed along all the way from
alopecia, which used to be called baldness, to zoster, which used to be
known as shingles. I was the patient of more than a dozen specialists.
Very pleasant persons, many of them, but what a fuss they made about my
trifling incommodities! 'Please look at that photograph. See if there is
a minute elevation under one eye.'

"'On which side?' I asked him, for I could not be sure there was anything
different on one side from what I saw on the other.

"'Under the left eye. I called it a pimple; the specialist called it
acne. Now look at this photograph. It was taken after my acne had been
three months under treatment. It shows a little more distinctly than in
the first photograph, does n't it?'

"'I think it does,' I answered. 'It does n't seem to me that you gained
a great deal by leaving your customary adviser for the specialist.'

"'Well,' my friend continued, 'following my wife's urgent counsel, I kept
on, as I told you, for a whole year with my specialists, going from head
to foot, and tapering off with a chiropodist. I got a deal of amusement
out of their contrivances and experiments. Some of them lighted up my
internal surfaces with electrical or other illuminating apparatus.
Thermometers, dynamometers, exploring-tubes, little mirrors that went
half-way down to my stomach, tuning-forks, ophthalmoscopes,
percussion-hammers, single and double stethoscopes, speculums,
sphygmometers,--such a battery of detective instruments I had never
imagined. All useful, I don't doubt; but at the end of the year I began
to question whether I should n't have done about as well to stick to my
long tried practitioner. When the bills for "professional services" came
in, and the new carpet had to be given up, and the old bonnet trimmed
over again, and the sealskin sack remained a vision, we both agreed, my
wife and I, that we would try to get along without consulting
specialists, except in such cases as our family physician considered to
be beyond his skill.'"

The Counsellor's story of his friend's experiences seemed to please the
young Doctor very much. It "stirred him up," but in an agreeable way;
for, as he said, he meant to devote himself to family practice, and not
to adopt any limited class of cases as a specialty. I liked his views so
well that I should have been ready to adopt them as my own, if they had
been challenged.

        The young Doctor discourses.

"I am very glad," he said, "that we have a number of practitioners among
us who confine themselves to the care of single organs and their
functions. I want to be able to consult an oculist who has done nothing
but attend to eyes long enough to know all that is known about their
diseases and their treatment,--skilful enough to be trusted with the
manipulation of that delicate and most precious organ. I want an aurist
who knows all about the ear and what can be done for its disorders. The
maladies of the larynx are very ticklish things to handle, and nobody
should be trusted to go behind the epiglottis who has not the tactus
eruditus. And so of certain other particular classes of complaints. A
great city must have a limited number of experts, each a final authority,
to be appealed to in cases where the family physician finds himself in
doubt. There are operations which no surgeon should be willing to
undertake unless he has paid a particular, if not an exclusive, attention
to the cases demanding such operations. All this I willingly grant.

"But it must not be supposed that we can return to the methods of the old
Egyptians--who, if my memory serves me correctly, had a special physician
for every part of the body--without falling into certain errors and
incurring certain liabilities.

"The specialist is much like other people engaged in lucrative business.
He is apt to magnify his calling, to make much of any symptom which will
bring a patient within range of his battery of remedies. I found a case
in one of our medical journals, a couple of years ago, which illustrates
what I mean. Dr. ___________ of Philadelphia, had a female patient with
a crooked nose,--deviated septum, if our young scholars like that better.
She was suffering from what the doctor called reflex headache. She had
been to an oculist, who found that the trouble was in her eyes. She went
from him to a gynecologist, who considered her headache as owing to
causes for which his specialty had the remedies. How many more
specialists would have appropriated her, if she had gone the rounds of
them all, I dare not guess; but you remember the old story of the siege,
in which each artisan proposed means of defence which he himself was
ready to furnish. Then a shoemaker said, 'Hang your walls with new
boots.'

"Human nature is the same with medical specialists as it was with ancient
cordwainers, and it is too possible that a hungry practitioner may be
warped by his interest in fastening on a patient who, as he persuades
himself, comes under his medical jurisdiction. The specialist has but one
fang with which to seize and bold his prey, but that fang is a fearfully
long and sharp canine. Being confined to a narrow field of observation
and practice, he is apt to give much of his time to curious study, which
may be magnifique, but is not exactly la guerre against the patient's
malady. He divides and subdivides, and gets many varieties of diseases,
in most respects similar. These he equips with new names, and thus we
have those terrific nomenclatures which are enough to frighten the
medical student, to say nothing of the sufferers staggering under this
long catalogue of local infirmities. The 'old-fogy' doctor, who knows
the family tendencies of his patient, who 'understands his constitution,'
will often treat him better than the famous specialist, who sees him for
the first time, and has to guess at many things 'the old doctor' knows
from his previous experience with the same patient and the family to
which he belongs.

"It is a great luxury to practise as a specialist in almost any class of
diseases. The special practitioner has his own hours, hardly needs a
night-bell, can have his residence out of the town in which he exercises
his calling, in short, lives like a gentleman; while the hard-worked
general practitioner submits to a servitude more exacting than that of
the man who is employed in his stable or in his kitchen. That is the kind
of life I have made up my mind to."

The teaspoons tinkled all round the table. This was the usual sign of
approbation, instead of the clapping of hands.

The young Doctor paused, and looked round among The Teacups. "I beg your
pardon," he said, "for taking up so much of your time with medicine. It
is a subject that a good many persons, especially ladies, take an
interest in and have a curiosity about, but I have no right to turn this
tea-table into a lecture platform."

"We should like to hear you talk longer about it," said the English
Annex. "One of us has thought of devoting herself to the practice of
medicine. Would you lecture to us; if you were a professor in one of the
great medical schools?"

"Lecture to students of your sex? Why not, I should like to know? I
don't think it is the calling for which the average woman is especially
adapted, but my teacher got a part of his medical education from a lady,
Madame Lachapelle; and I don't see why, if one can learn from a woman, he
may not teach a woman, if he knows enough."

"We all like a little medical talk now and then," said Number Five, "and
we are much obliged to you for your discourse. You are specialist enough
to take care of a sprained ankle, I suppose, are you not?"

"I hope I should be equal to that emergency," answered the young Doctor;
"but I trust you are not suffering from any such accident?"

"No," said Number Five, "but there is no telling what may happen. I
might slip, and get a sprain or break a sinew, or something, and I should
like to know that there is a practitioner at hand to take care of my
injury. I think I would risk myself in your bands, although you are not
a specialist. Would you venture to take charge of the case?"

"Ah, my dear lady," he answered gallantly, "the risk would be in the
other direction. I am afraid it would be safer for your doctor if he
were an older man than I am."

This is the first clearly, indisputably sentimental outbreak which has
happened in conversation at our table. I tremble to think what will come
of it; for we have several inflammable elements in our circle, and a
spark like this is liable to light on any one or two of them.

I was not sorry that this medical episode came in to vary the usual
course of talk at our table. I like to have one--of an intelligent
company, who knows anything thoroughly, hold the floor for a time, and
discourse upon the subject which chiefly engages his daily thoughts and
furnishes his habitual occupation. It is a privilege to meet such a
person now and then, and let him have his full swing. But because there
are "professionals" to whom we are willing to listen as oracles, I do not
want to see everybody who is not a "professional" silenced or snubbed, if
he ventures into any field of knowledge which he has not made especially
his own. I like to read Montaigne's remarks about doctors, though he
never took a medical degree. I can even enjoy the truth in the sharp
satire of Voltaire on the medical profession. I frequently prefer the
remarks I hear from the pew after the sermon to those I have just been
hearing from the pulpit. There are a great many things which I never
expect to comprehend, but which I desire very much to apprehend. Suppose
that our circle of Teacups were made up of specialists,--experts in
various departments. I should be very willing that each one should have
his innings at the proper time, when the company were ready for him. But
the time is coming when everybody will know something about every thing.
How can one have the illustrated magazines, the "Popular Science
Monthly," the Psychological journals, the theological periodicals, books
on all subjects, forced on his attention, in their own persons, so to
speak, or in the reviews which analyze and pass judgment upon them,
without getting some ideas which belong to many provinces of human
intelligence? The air we breathe is made up of four elements, at least:
oxygen, nitrogen, carbonic acid gas, and knowledge. There is something
quite delightful to witness in the absorption and devotion of a genuine
specialist. There is a certain sublimity in that picture of the dying
scholar in Browning's "A Grammarian's Funeral:"--

  "So with the throttling hands of death at strife,
     Ground he at grammar;
   Still, through the rattle, parts of speech were rife;
     While he could stammer
   He settled Hoti's business--let it be--
     Properly based Oun
   Gave us the doctrine of the enclitic De,
     Dead from the waist down."

A genuine enthusiasm, which will never be satisfied until it has pumped
the well dry at the bottom of which truth is lying, always excites our
interest, if not our admiration.

One of the pleasantest of our American writers, whom we all remember as
Ik Marvel, and greet in his more recent appearance as Donald Grant
Mitchell, speaks of the awkwardness which he feels in offering to the
public a "panoramic view of British writers in these days of
specialists,--when students devote half a lifetime to the analysis of the
works of a single author, and to the proper study of a single period."

He need not have feared that his connected sketches of "English Lands,
Letters and Kings" would be any less welcome because they do not pretend
to fill up all the details or cover all the incidents they hint in vivid
outline. How many of us ever read or ever will read Drayton's
"Poly-Olbion?" Twenty thousand long Alexandrines are filled with
admirable descriptions of scenery, natural productions, and historical
events, but how many of us in these days have time to read and inwardly
digest twenty thousand Alexandrine verses? I fear that the specialist is
apt to hold his intelligent reader or hearer too cheap. So far as I have
observed in medical specialties, what he knows in addition to the
knowledge of the well-taught general practitioner is very largely curious
rather than important. Having exhausted all that is practical, the
specialist is naturally tempted to amuse himself with the natural history
of the organ or function he deals with; to feel as a writing-master does
when he sets a copy,--not content to shape the letters properly, but he
must add flourishes and fancy figures, to let off his spare energy.

I am beginning to be frightened. When I began these papers, my idea was
a very simple and innocent one. Here was a mixed company, of various
conditions, as I have already told my readers, who came together
regularly, and before they were aware of it formed something like a club
or association. As I was the patriarch among them, they gave me the name
some of you may need to be reminded of; for as these reports are
published at intervals, you may not remember the fact that I am what The
Teacups have seen fit to call The Dictator.

Now, what did I expect when I began these papers, and what is it that has
begun to frighten me?

I expected to report grave conversations and light colloquial passages of
arms among the members of the circle. I expected to hear, perhaps to
read, a paper now and then. I expected to have, from time to time, a
poem from some one of The Teacups, for I felt sure there must be among
them one or more poets,--Teacups of the finer and rarer translucent kind
of porcelain, to speak metaphorically.

Out of these conversations and written contributions I thought I might
make up a readable series of papers; a not wholly unwelcome string of
recollections, anticipations, suggestions, too often perhaps repetitions,
that would be to the twilight what my earlier series had been to the
morning.

I hoped also that I should come into personal relations with my old
constituency, if I may call my nearer friends, and those more distant
ones who belong to my reading parish, by that name. It is time that I
should. I received this blessed morning--I am telling the literal
truth--a highly flattering obituary of myself in the shape of an extract
from "Le National" of the 10th of February last. This is a bi-weekly
newspaper, published in French, in the city of Plattsburg, Clinton
County, New York. I am occasionally reminded by my unknown friends that
I must hurry up their autograph, or make haste to copy that poem they
wish to have in the author's own handwriting, or it will be too late; but
I have never before been huddled out of the world in this way. I take
this rather premature obituary as a hint that, unless I come to some
arrangement with my well-meaning but insatiable correspondents, it would
be as well to leave it in type, for I cannot bear much longer the load
they lay upon me. I will explain myself on this point after I have told
my readers what has frightened me.

I am beginning to think this room where we take our tea is more like a
tinder-box than a quiet and safe place for "a party in a parlor." It is
true that there are at least two or three incombustibles at our table,
but it looks to me as if the company might pair off before the season is
over, like the crew of Her Majesty's ship the Mantelpiece,--three or four
weddings clear our whole table of all but one or two of the impregnables.
The poem we found in the sugar-bowl last week first opened my eyes to the
probable state of things. Now, the idea of having to tell a
love-story,--perhaps two or three love-stories,--when I set out with the
intention of repeating instructive, useful, or entertaining discussions,
naturally alarms me. It is quite true that many things which look to me
suspicious may be simply playful. Young people (and we have several such
among The Teacups) are fond of make-believe courting when they cannot
have the real thing,--"flirting," as it used to be practised in the days
of Arcadian innocence, not the more modern and more questionable
recreation which has reached us from the home of the cicisbeo. Whatever
comes of it, I shall tell what I see, and take the consequences.

But I am at this moment going to talk in my own proper person to my own
particular public, which, as I find by my correspondence, is a very
considerable one, and with which I consider myself in exceptionally
pleasant relations.

I have read recently that Mr. Gladstone receives six hundred letters a
day. Perhaps he does not receive six hundred letters every day, but if
he gets anything like half that number daily, what can he do with them?
There was a time when he was said to answer all his correspondents. It
is understood, I think, that he has given up doing so in these later
days.

I do not pretend that I receive six hundred or even sixty letters a day,
but I do receive a good many, and have told the public of the fact from
time to time, under the pressure of their constantly increasing
exertions. As it is extremely onerous, and is soon going to be
impossible, for me to keep up the wide range of correspondence which has
become a large part of my occupation, and tends to absorb all the vital
force which is left me, I wish to enter into a final explanation with the
well-meaning but merciless taskmasters who have now for many years been
levying their daily tax upon me. I have preserved thousands of their
letters, and destroyed a very large number, after answering most of them.
A few interesting chapters might be made out of the letters I have
kept,--not only such as are signed by the names of well-known personages,
but many from unknown friends, of whom I had never heard before and have
never heard since. A great deal of the best writing the languages of the
world have ever known has been committed to leaves that withered out of
sight before a second sunlight had fallen upon them. I have had many
letters I should have liked to give the public, had their nature admitted
of their being offered to the world. What straggles of young ambition,
finding no place for its energies, or feeling its incapacity to reach the
ideal towards which it was striving! What longings of disappointed,
defeated fellow-mortals, trying to find a new home for themselves in the
heart of one whom they have amiably idealized! And oh, what hopeless
efforts of mediocrities and inferiorities, believing in themselves as
superiorities, and stumbling on through limping disappointments to
prostrate failure! Poverty comes pleading, not for charity, for the most
part, but imploring us to find a purchaser for its unmarketable wares.
The unreadable author particularly requests us to make a critical
examination of his book, and report to him whatever may be our
verdict,--as if he wanted anything but our praise, and that very often to
be used in his publisher's advertisements.

But what does not one have to submit to who has become the martyr--the
Saint Sebastian--of a literary correspondence! I will not dwell on the
possible impression produced on a sensitive nature by reading one's own
premature obituary, as I have told you has been my recent experience. I
will not stop to think whether the urgent request for an autograph by
return post, in view of the possible contingencies which might render it
the last one was ever to write, is pleasing or not. At threescore and
twenty one must expect such hints of what is like to happen before long.
I suppose, if some near friend were to watch one who was looking over
such a pressing letter, he might possibly see a slight shadow flit over
the reader's features, and some such dialogue might follow as that
between Othello and Iago, after "this honest creature" has been giving
breath to his suspicions about Desdemona:

  "I see this hath a little dash'd your spirits.
   Not a jot, not a jot.
     .............
   "My lord, I see you're moved."

And a little later the reader might, like Othello, complain,

  "I have a pain upon my forehead here."

Nothing more likely. But, for myself, I have grown callous to all such
allusions. The repetition of the Scriptural phrase for the natural term
of life is so frequent that it wears out one's sensibilities.

But how many charming and refreshing letters I have received! How often
I have felt their encouragement in moments of doubt and depression, such
as the happiest temperaments must sometimes experience!

If the time comes when to answer all my kind unknown friends, even by
dictation, is impossible, or more than I feel equal to, I wish to refer
any of those who may feel disappointed at not receiving an answer to the
following general acknowledgments:

I. I am always grateful for any attention which shows me that I am
kindly remembered.--II. Your pleasant message has been read to me, and
has been thankfully listened to.--III. Your book (your essay) (your
poem) has reached me safely, and has received all the respectful
attention to which it seemed entitled. It would take more than all the
time I have at my disposal to read all the printed matter and all the
manuscripts which are sent to me, and you would not ask me to attempt the
impossible. You will not, therefore, expect me to express a critical
opinion of your work.--IV. I am deeply sensible to your expressions of
personal attachment to me as the author of certain writings which have
brought me very near to you, in virtue of some affinity in our ways of
thought and moods of feeling. Although I cannot keep up correspondences
with many of my readers who seem to be thoroughly congenial with myself,
let them be assured that their letters have been read or heard with
peculiar gratification, and are preserved as precious treasures.

I trust that after this notice no correspondent will be surprised to find
his or her letter thus answered by anticipation; and that if one of the
above formulae is the only answer he receives, the unknown friend will
remember that he or she is one of a great many whose incessant demands
have entirely outrun my power of answering them as fully as the
applicants might wish and perhaps expect.

I could make a very interesting volume of the letters I have received
from correspondents unknown to the world of authorship, but writing from
an instinctive impulse, which many of them say they have long felt and
resisted. One must not allow himself to be flattered into an
overestimate of his powers because he gets many letters expressing a
peculiar attraction towards his books, and a preference of them to those
with which he would not have dared to compare his own. Still, if the
homo unius libri--the man of one book--choose to select one of our own
writing as his favorite volume, it means something,--not much, perhaps;
but if one has unlocked the door to the secret entrance of one heart, it
is not unlikely that his key may fit the locks of others. What if nature
has lent him a master key? He has found the wards and slid back the bolt
of one lock; perhaps he may have learned the secret of others. One
success is an encouragement to try again. Let the writer of a truly
loving letter, such as greets one from time to time, remember that,
though he never hears a word from it, it may prove one of the best
rewards of an anxious and laborious past, and the stimulus of a still
aspiring future.

Among the letters I have recently received, none is more interesting than
the following. The story of Helen Keller, who wrote it, is told in the
well-known illustrated magazine called "The Wide Awake," in the number
for July, 1888. For the account of this little girl, now between nine
and ten years old, and other letters of her writing, I must refer to the
article I have mentioned. It is enough to say that she is deaf and dumb
and totally blind. She was seven years old when her teacher, Miss
Sullivan, under the direction of Mr. Anagnos, at the Blind Asylum at
South Boston, began her education. A child fuller of life and happiness
it would be hard to find. It seems as if her soul was flooded with light
and filled with music that had found entrance to it through avenues
closed to other mortals. It is hard to understand how she has learned to
deal with abstract ideas, and so far to supplement the blanks left by the
senses of sight and hearing that one would hardly think of her as wanting
in any human faculty. Remember Milton's pathetic picture of himself,
suffering from only one of poor little Helen's deprivations:

             "Not to me returns
   Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn,
   Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer's rose,
   Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine;
   But cloud instead, and ever-during dark
   Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
   Cut off, and for the book of knowledge fair
   Presented with a universal blank
   Of Nature's works, to me expunged and rased,
   And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out."

Surely for this loving and lovely child does

          "the celestial Light
     Shine inward."

Anthropologist, metaphysician, most of all theologian, here is a lesson
which can teach you much that you will not find in your primers and
catechisms. Why should I call her "poor little Helen"? Where can you
find a happier child?

SOUTH BOSTON, MASS., March 1, 1890.

DEAR KIND POET,--I have thought of you many times since that bright
Sunday when I bade you goodbye, and I am going to write you a letter
because I love you. I am sorry that you have no little children to play
with sometimes, but I think you are very happy with your books, and your
many, many friends. On Washington's Birthday a great many people came
here to see the little blind children, and I read for them from your
poems, and showed them some beautiful shells which came from a little
island near Palos. I am reading a very sad story called "Little Jakey."
Jakey was the sweetest little fellow you can imagine, but he was poor and
blind. I used to think, when I was small and before I could read, that
everybody was always happy, and at first it made me very sad to know
about pain and great sorrow; but now I know that we could never learn to
be brave and patient, if there were only joy in the world. I am studying
about insects in Zoology, and I have learned many things about
butterflies. They do not make honey for us, like the bees, but many of
them are as beautiful as the flowers they light upon, and they always
delight the hearts of little children. They live a gay life, flitting
from flower to flower, sipping the drops of honey-dew, without a thought
for the morrow. They are just like little boys and girls when they
forget books and studies, and run away to the woods and the fields to
gather wild-flowers, or wade in the ponds for fragrant lilies, happy in
the bright sunshine. If my little sister comes to Boston next June, will
you let me bring her to see you? She is a lovely baby and I am sure you
will love [her]. Now I must tell my gentle poet good-bye, for I have a
letter to write home before I go to bed. From your loving little friend,
HELEN A. KELLER.

The reading of this letter made many eyes glisten, and a dead silence
hushed the whole circle. All at once Delilah, our pretty table-maid,
forgot her place,--what business had she to be listening to our
conversation and reading?--and began sobbing, just as if she had been a
lady. She could n't help it, she explained afterwards,--she had a little
blind sister at the asylum, who had told her about Helen's reading to the
children.

It was very awkward, this breaking-down of our pretty Delilah, for one
girl crying will sometimes set off a whole row of others,--it is as
hazardous as lighting one cracker in a bunch. The two Annexes hurried
out their pocket-handkerchiefs, and I almost expected a semi-hysteric
cataclysm. At this critical moment Number Five called Delilah to her,
looked into her face with those calm eyes of hers, and spoke a few soft
words. Was Number Five forgetful, too? Did she not remember the
difference of their position? I suppose so. But she quieted the poor
handmaiden as simply and easily as a nursing mother quiets her unweaned
baby. Why are we not all in love with Number Five? Perhaps we are. At
any rate, I suspect the Professor. When we all get quiet, I will touch
him up about that visit she promised to make to his laboratory.

I got a chance at last to speak privately with him.

"Did Number Five go to meet you in your laboratory, as she talked of
doing?"

"Oh, yes, of course she did,--why, she said she would!"

"Oh, to be sure. Do tell me what she wanted in your laboratory."

"She wanted me to burn a diamond for her."

"Burn a diamond! What was that for? Because Cleopatra swallowed a
pearl?"

"No, nothing of that kind. It was a small stone, and had a flaw in it.
Number Five said she did n't want a diamond with a flaw in it, and that
she did want to see how a diamond would burn."

"Was that all that happened?"

"That was all. She brought the two Annexes with her, and I gave my three
visitors a lecture on carbon, which they seemed to enjoy very much."

I looked steadily in the Professor's face during the reading of the
following poem. I saw no questionable look upon it,--but he has a
remarkable command of his features. Number Five read it with a certain
archness of expression, as if she saw all its meaning, which I think some
of the company did not quite take in. They said they must read it slowly
and carefully. Somehow, "I like you" and "I love you" got a little
mixed, as they heard it. It was not Number Five's fault, for she read it
beautifully, as we all agreed, and as I knew she would when I handed it
to her.

     I LIKE YOU AND I LOVE YOU.

   I LIKE YOU met I LOVE YOU, face to face;
   The path was narrow, and they could not pass.
   I LIKE YOU smiled; I LOVE YOU cried, Alas!
   And so they halted for a little space.

  "Turn thou and go before," I LOVE YOU said,
  "Down the green pathway, bright with many a flower
   Deep in the valley, lo! my bridal bower
   Awaits thee." But I LIKE YOU shook his head.

   Then while they lingered on the span-wide shelf
   That shaped a pathway round the rocky ledge,
   I LIKE YOU bared his icy dagger's edge,
   And first he slew I LOVE YOU,--then himself.




VII

There is no use in burdening my table with those letters of inquiry as to
where our meetings are held, and what are the names of the persons
designated by numbers, or spoken of under the titles of the Professor,
the Tutor, and so forth. It is enough that you are aware who I am, and
that I am known at the tea-table as The Dictator. Theatrical "asides" are
apt to be whispered in a pretty loud voice, and the persons who ought not
to have any idea of what is said are expected to be reasonably hard of
bearing. If I named all The Teacups, some of them might be offended. If
any of my readers happen to be able to identify any one Teacup by some
accidental circumstance,--say, for instance, Number Five, by the incident
of her burning the diamond,--I hope they will keep quiet about it.
Number Five does n't want to be pointed out in the street as the
extravagant person who makes use of such expensive fuel, for the story
would soon grow to a statement that she always uses diamonds, instead of
cheaper forms of carbon, to heat her coffee with. So with other members
of the circle. The "Cracked Teacup," Number Seven, would not, perhaps,
be pleased to recognize himself under that title. I repeat it,
therefore, Do not try to identify the individual Teacups. You will not
get them right; or, if you do, you may too probably make trouble. How is
it possible that I can keep up my freedom of intercourse with you all if
you insist on bellowing my "asides" through a speaking-trumpet? Besides,
you cannot have failed to see that there are strong symptoms of the
springing up of delicate relations between some of our number. I told
you how it would be. It did not require a prophet to foresee that the
saucy intruder who, as Mr. Willis wrote, and the dear dead girls used to
sing, in our young days,

        "Taketh every form of air,
     And every shape of earth,
     And comes unbidden everywhere,
     Like thought's mysterious birth,"

would pop his little curly head up between one or more pairs of Teacups.
If you will stop these questions, then, I will go on with my reports of
what was said and done at our meetings over the teacups.

Of all things beautiful in this fair world, there is nothing so
enchanting to look upon, to dream about, as the first opening of the
flower of young love. How closely the calyx has hidden the glowing
leaves in its quiet green mantle! Side by side, two buds have been
tossing jauntily in the breeze, often brought very near to each other,
sometimes touching for a moment, with a secret thrill in their
close-folded heart-leaves, it may be, but still the cool green sepals
shutting tight over the burning secret within. All at once a morning ray
touches one of the two buds, and the point of a blushing petal betrays
the imprisoned and swelling blossom.

--Oh, no, I did not promise a love-story. There may be a little
sentiment now and then, but these papers are devoted chiefly to the
opinions, prejudices, fancies, whims, of myself, The Dictator, and others
of The Teacups who have talked or written for the general benefit of the
company.

Here are some of the remarks I made the other evening on the subject of
Intellectual Over-Feeding and its consequence, Mental Dyspepsia. There is
something positively appalling in the amount of printed matter yearly,
monthly, weekly, daily, secreted by that great gland of the civilized
organism, the press. I need not dilate upon this point, for it is
brought home to every one of you who ever looks into a bookstore or a
public library. So large is the variety of literary products continually
coming forward, forced upon the attention of the reader by stimulating
and suggestive titles, commended to his notice by famous names, recasting
old subjects and developing and illustrating new ones, that the mind is
liable to be urged into a kind of unnatural hunger, leading to a
repletion which is often followed by disgust and disturbed nervous
conditions as its natural consequence.

It has long been a favorite rule with me, a rule which I have never lost
sight of, however imperfectly I have carried it out: Try to know enough
of a wide range of subjects to profit by the conversation of intelligent
persons of different callings and various intellectual gifts and
acquisitions. The cynic will paraphrase this into a shorter formula: Get
a smattering in every sort of knowledge. I must therefore add a second
piece of advice: Learn to hold as of small account the comments of the
cynic. He is often amusing, sometimes really witty, occasionally,
without meaning it, instructive; but his talk is to profitable
conversation what the stone is to the pulp of the peach, what the cob is
to the kernels on an ear of Indian corn. Once more: Do not be bullied out
of your common sense by the specialist; two to one, he is a pedant, with
all his knowledge and valuable qualities, and will "cavil on the ninth
part of a hair," if it will give him a chance to show off his idle
erudition.

I saw attributed to me, the other day, the saying, "Know something about
everything, and everything about something." I am afraid it does not
belong to me, but I will treat it as I used to treat a stray boat which
came through my meadow, floating down the Housatonic,--get hold of it and
draw it ashore, and hold on to it until the owner turns up. If this
precept is used discreetly, it is very serviceable; but it is as well to
recognize the fact that you cannot know something about everything in
days like these of intellectual activity, of literary and scientific
production. We all feel this. It makes us nervous to see the shelves of
new books, many of which we feel as if we ought to read, and some among
them to study. We must adopt some principle of selection among the books
outside of any particular branch which we may have selected for study. I
have often been asked what books I would recommend for a course of
reading. I have always answered that I had a great deal rather take
advice than give it. Fortunately, a number of scholars have furnished
lists of books to which the inquirer may be directed. But the worst of
it is that each student is in need of a little library specially adapted
to his wants. Here is a young man writing to me from a Western college,
and wants me to send him a list of the books which I think would be most
useful to him. He does not send me his intellectual measurements, and he
might as well have sent to a Boston tailor for a coat, without any hint
of his dimensions in length, breadth, and thickness.

But instead of laying down rules for reading, and furnishing lists of the
books which should be read in order, I will undertake the much humbler
task of giving a little quasi-medical advice to persons, young or old,
suffering from book-hunger, book-surfeit, book-nervousness,
book-indigestion, book-nausea, and all other maladies which, directly or
indirectly, may be traced to books, and to which I could give Greek or
Latin names if I thought it worth while.

I have a picture hanging in my library, a lithograph, of which many of my
readers may have seen copies. It represents a gray-haired old book-lover
at the top of a long flight of steps. He finds himself in clover, so to
speak, among rare old editions, books he has longed to look upon and
never seen before, rarities, precious old volumes, incunabula,
cradle-books, printed while the art was in its infancy,--its glorious
infancy, for it was born a giant. The old bookworm is so intoxicated
with the sight and handling of the priceless treasures that he cannot
bear to put one of the volumes back after he has taken it from the shelf.
So there he stands,--one book open in his hands, a volume under each arm,
and one or more between his legs,--loaded with as many as he can possibly
hold at the same time.

Now, that is just the way in which the extreme form of book-hunger shows
itself in the reader whose appetite has become over-developed. He wants
to read so many books that he over-crams himself with the crude materials
of knowledge, which become knowledge only when the mental digestion has
time to assimilate them. I never can go into that famous "Corner
Bookstore" and look over the new books in the row before me, as I enter
the door, without seeing half a dozen which I want to read, or at least
to know something about. I cannot empty my purse of its contents, and
crowd my bookshelves with all those volumes. The titles of many of them
interest me. I look into one or two, perhaps. I have sometimes picked
up a line or a sentence, in these momentary glances between the uncut
leaves of a new book, which I have never forgotten. As a trivial but
bona fide example, one day I opened a book on duelling. I remember only
these words: "Conservons-la, cette noble institution." I had never
before seen duelling called a noble institution, and I wish I had taken
the name of the book. Book-tasting is not necessarily profitless, but it
is very stimulating, and makes one hungry for more than he needs for the
nourishment of his thinking-marrow. To feed this insatiable hunger, the
abstracts, the reviews, do their best. But these, again, have grown so
numerous and so crowded with matter that it is hard to find time to
master their contents. We are accustomed, therefore, to look for
analyses of these periodicals, and at last we have placed before us a
formidable-looking monthly, "The Review of Reviews." After the analyses
comes the newspaper notice; and there is still room for the epigram,
which sometimes makes short work with all that has gone before on the
same subject.

It is just as well to recognize the fact that if one should read day and
night, confining himself to his own language, he could not pretend to
keep up with the press. He might as well try to race with a locomotive.
The first discipline, therefore, is that of despair. If you could stick
to your reading day and night for fifty years, what a learned idiot you
would become long before the half-century was over! Well, then, there is
no use in gorging one's self with knowledge, and no need of self-reproach
because one is content to remain more or less ignorant of many things
which interest his fellow-creatures. We gain a good deal of knowledge
through the atmosphere; we learn a great deal by accidental hearsay,
provided we have the mordant in our own consciousness which makes the
wise remark, the significant fact, the instructive incident, take hold
upon it. After the stage of despair comes the period of consolation. We
soon find that we are not so much worse off than most of our neighbors as
we supposed. The fractional value of the wisest shows a small numerator
divided by an infinite denominator of knowledge.

I made some explanations to The Teacups, the other evening, which they
received very intelligently and graciously, as I have no doubt the
readers of these reports of mine will receive them. If the reader will
turn back to the end of the fourth number of these papers, he will find
certain lines entitled, "Cacoethes Scribendi." They were said to have
been taken from the usual receptacle of the verses which are contributed
by The Teacups, and, though the fact was not mentioned, were of my own
composition. I found them in manuscript in my drawer, and as my subject
had naturally suggested the train of thought they carried out into
extravagance, I printed them. At the same time they sounded very
natural, as we say, and I felt as if I had published them somewhere or
other before; but I could find no evidence of it, and so I ventured to
have them put in type.

And here I wish to take breath for a short, separate paragraph. I have
often felt, after writing a line which pleased me more than common, that
it was not new, and perhaps was not my own. I have very rarely, however,
found such a coincidence in ideas or expression as would be enough to
justify an accusation of unconscious plagiarism,--conscious plagiarism is
not my particular failing. I therefore say my say, set down my thought,
print my line, and do not heed the suspicion that I may not be as
original as I supposed, in the passage I have been writing. My
experience may be worth something to a modest young writer, and so I have
interrupted what I was about to say by intercalating this paragraph.

In this instance my telltale suspicion had not been at fault. I had
printed those same lines, years ago, in "The Contributors' Club," to
which I have rarely sent any of my prose or verse. Nobody but the editor
has noticed the fact, so far as I know. This is consoling, or
mortifying, I hardly know which. I suppose one has a right to plagiarize
from himself, but he does not want to present his work as fresh from the
workshop when it has been long standing in his neighbor's shop-window.

But I have just received a letter from a brother of the late Henry Howard
Brownell, the poet of the Bay Fight and the River Fight, in which he
quotes a passage from an old book, "A Heroine, Adventures of Cherubina,"
which might well have suggested my own lines, if I had ever seen it. I
have not the slightest recollection of the book or the passage. I think
its liveliness and "local color" will make it please the reader, as it
pleases me, more than my own more prosaic extravagances:

   LINES TO A PRETTY LITTLE MAID OF MAMMA'S.

   "If Black Sea, Red Sea, White Sea, ran
   One tide of ink to Ispahan,
   If all the geese in Lincoln fens
   Produced spontaneous well-made pens,
   If Holland old and Holland new
   One wondrous sheet of paper grew,
   And could I sing but half the grace
   Of half a freckle in thy face,
   Each syllable I wrote would reach
   From Inverness to Bognor's beach,
   Each hair-stroke be a river Rhine,
   Each verse an equinoctial line!"

"The immediate dismissal of the 'little maid' was the consequence."

I may as well say that our Delilah was not in the room when the last
sentence was read.

Readers must be either very good-natured or very careless. I have laid
myself open to criticism by more than one piece of negligence, which has
been passed over without invidious comment by the readers of my papers.
How could I, for instance, have written in my original "copy" for the
printer about the fisherman baiting his hook with a giant's tail instead
of a dragon's? It is the automatic fellow,--Me--Number-Two of our dual
personality,--who does these things, who forgets the message
Me--Number--One sends down to him from the cerebral convolutions, and
substitutes a wrong word for the right one. I suppose Me--Number--Two
will "sass back," and swear that "giant's" was the message which came
down from headquarters. He is always doing the wrong thing and excusing
himself. Who blows out the gas instead of shutting it off? Who puts the
key in the desk and fastens it tight with the spring lock? Do you mean
to say that the upper Me, the Me of the true thinking-marrow, the
convolutions of the brain, does not know better? Of course he does, and
Me-Number-Two is a careless servant, who remembers some old direction,
and follows that instead of the one just given.

Number Seven demurred to this, and I am not sure that he is wrong in so
doing. He maintains that the automatic fellow always does just what he
is told to do. Number Five is disposed to agree with him. We will talk
over the question.

But come, now, why should not a giant have a tail as well as a dragon?
Linnaeus admitted the homo caudatus into his anthropological catalogue.
The human embryo has a very well marked caudal appendage; that is, the
vertebral column appears prolonged, just as it is in a young quadruped.
During the late session of the Medical Congress at Washington, my friend
Dr. Priestley, a distinguished London physician, of the highest character
and standing, showed me the photograph of a small boy, some three or four
years old, who had a very respectable little tail, which would have
passed muster on a pig, and would have made a frog or a toad ashamed of
himself. I have never heard what became of the little boy, nor have I
looked in the books or journals to find out if there are similar cases on
record, but I have no doubt that there are others. And if boys may have
this additional ornament to their vertebral columns, why not men? And if
men, why not giants? So I may not have made a very bad blunder, after
all, and my reader has learned something about the homo caudatus as
spoken of by Linnxus, and as shown me in photograph by Dr. Priestley.
This child is a candidate for the vacant place of Missing Link.

In accounting for the blunders, and even gross blunders, which, sooner or
later, one who writes much is pretty sure to commit, I must not forget
the part played by the blind spot or idiotic area in the brain, which I
have already described.

The most knowing persons we meet with are sometimes at fault. Nova
onania possumus omnes is not a new nor profound axiom, but it is well to
remember it as a counterpoise to that other truly American saying of the
late Mr. Samuel Patch, "Some things can be done as well as others." Yes,
some things, but not all things. We all know men and women who hate to
admit their ignorance of anything. Like Talkative in "Pilgrim's
Progress," they are ready to converse of "things heavenly or things
earthly; things moral or things evangelical; things sacred or things
profane; things past or things to come; things foreign or things at home;
things more essential or things circumstantial."

Talkative is apt to be a shallow fellow, and to say foolish things about
matters he only half understands, and yet he has his place in society.
The specialists would grow to be intolerable, were they not counterpoised
to some degree by the people of general intelligence. The man who knows
too much about one particular subject is liable to become a terrible
social infliction. Some of the worst bores (to use plain language) we
ever meet with are recognized as experts of high grade in their
respective departments. Beware of making so much as a pinhole in the dam
that holds back their knowledge. They ride their hobbies without bit or
bridle. A poet on Pegasus, reciting his own verses, is hardly more to be
dreaded than a mounted specialist.

One of the best offices which women perform for men is that of tasting
books for them. They may or may not be profound students,--some of them
are; but we do not expect to meet women like Mrs. Somerville, or Caroline
Herschel, or Maria Mitchell at every dinner-table or afternoon tea. But
give your elect lady a pile of books to look over for you, and she will
tell you what they have for her and for you in less time than you would
have wasted in stupefying yourself over a single volume.

One of the encouraging signs of the times is the condensed and
abbreviated form in which knowledge is presented to the general reader.
The short biographies of historic personages, of which within the past
few years many have been published, have been a great relief to the large
class of readers who want to know something, but not too much, about
them.

What refuge is there for the victim who is oppressed with the feeling
that there are a thousand new books he ought to read, while life is only
long enough for him to attempt to read a hundred? Many readers remember
what old Rogers, the poet, said:

"When I hear a new book talked about or have it pressed upon me, I read
an old one."

Happy the man who finds his rest in the pages of some favorite classic!
I know no reader more to be envied than that friend of mine who for many
years has given his days and nights to the loving study of Horace. After
a certain period in life, it is always with an effort that we admit a new
author into the inner circle of our intimates. The Parisian omnibuses,
as I remember them half a century ago,--they may still keep to the same
habit, for aught that I know,--used to put up the sign "Complet" as soon
as they were full. Our public conveyances are never full until the
natural atmospheric pressure of sixteen pounds to the square inch is
doubled, in the close packing of the human sardines that fill the
all-accommodating vehicles. A new-comer, however well mannered and well
dressed, is not very welcome under these circumstances. In the same way,
our tables are full of books half-read and books we feel that we must
read. And here come in two thick volumes, with uncut leaves, in small
type, with many pages, and many lines to a page,--a book that must be
read and ought to be read at once. What a relief to hand it over to the
lovely keeper of your literary conscience, who will tell you all that you
will most care to know about it, and leave you free to plunge into your
beloved volume, in which you are ever finding new beauties, and from
which you rise refreshed, as if you had just come from the cool waters of
Hippocrene! The stream of modern literature represented by the books and
periodicals on the crowded counters is a turbulent and clamorous torrent,
dashing along among the rocks of criticism, over the pebbles of the
world's daily events; trying to make itself seen and heard amidst the
hoarse cries of the politicians and the rumbling wheels of traffic. The
classic is a still lakelet, a mountain tarn, fed by springs that never
fail, its surface never ruffled by storms,--always the same, always
smiling a welcome to its visitor. Such is Horace to my friend. To his
eye "Lydia, dic per omnes" is as familiar as "Pater noster qui es in
caelis" to that of a pious Catholic. "Integer vitae," which he has put
into manly English, his Horace opens to as Watt's hymn-book opens to
"From all that dwell below the skies." The more he reads, the more he
studies his author, the richer are the treasures he finds. And what
Horace is to him, Homer, or Virgil, or Dante is to many a quiet reader,
sick to death of the unending train of bookmakers.

I have some curious books in my library, a few of which I should like to
say something about to The Teacups, when they have no more immediately
pressing subjects before them. A library of a few thousand volumes ought
always to have some books in it which the owner almost never opens, yet
with whose backs he is so well acquainted that he feels as if he knew
something of their contents. They are like those persons whom we meet in
our daily walks, with whose faces and figures, whose summer and winter
garments, whose walking-sticks and umbrellas even, we feel acquainted,
and yet whose names, whose business, whose residences, we know nothing
about. Some of these books are so formidable in their dimensions, so
rusty and crabbed in their aspect, that it takes a considerable amount of
courage to attack them.

I will ask Delilah to bring down from my library a very thick, stout
volume, bound in parchment, and standing on the lower shelf, next the
fireplace. The pretty handmaid knows my books almost as if she were my
librarian, and I don't doubt she would have found it if I had given only
the name on the back.

Delilah returned presently, with the heavy quarto in her arms. It was a
pleasing sight,--the old book in the embrace of the fresh young damsel.
I felt, on looking at them, as I did when I followed the slip of a girl
who conducted us in the Temple, that ancient building in the heart of
London. The long-enduring monuments of the dead do so mock the fleeting
presence of the living!

Is n't this book enough to scare any of you? I said, as Delilah dumped
it down upon the table. The teacups jumped from their saucers as it
thumped on the board. Danielis Georgii Morhofii Polyhistor, Literarius,
Philosophicus et Poeticus. Lubecae MDCCXXXIII. Perhaps I should not
have ventured to ask you to look at this old volume, if it had not been
for the fact that Dr. Johnson mentions Morohof as the author to whom he
was specially indebted.--more, I think, than to any other. It is a grand
old encyclopaedic summary of all the author knew about pretty nearly
everything, full of curious interest, but so strangely mediaeval, so
utterly antiquated in most departments of knowledge, that it is hard to
believe the volume came from the press at a time when persons whom I well
remember were living. Is it possible that the books which have been for
me what Morhof was for Dr. Johnson can look like that to the student of
the year 1990?

Morhof was a believer in magic and the transmutation of metals. There was
always something fascinating to me in the old books of alchemy. I have
felt that the poetry of science lost its wings when the last powder of
projection had been cast into the crucible, and the fire of the last
transmutation furnace went out. Perhaps I am wrong in implying that
alchemy is an extinct folly. It existed in New England's early days, as
we learn from the Winthrop papers, and I see no reason why gold-making
should not have its votaries as well as other popular delusions.

Among the essays of Morhof is one on the "Paradoxes of the Senses." That
title brought to mind the recollection of another work I have been
meaning to say something about, at some time when you were in the
listening mood. The book I refer to is "A Budget of Paradoxes," by
Augustus De Morgan. De Morgan is well remembered as a very distinguished
mathematician, whose works have kept his name in high honor to the
present time. The book I am speaking of was published by his widow, and
is largely made up of letters received by him and his comments upon them.
Few persons ever read it through. Few intelligent readers ever took it
up and laid it down without taking a long draught of its singular and
interesting contents. The letters are mostly from that class of persons
whom we call "cranks," in our familiar language.

At this point Number Seven interrupted me by calling out, "Give us some
of those cranks' letters. A crank is a man who does his own thinking. I
had a relation who was called a crank. I believe I have been spoken of
as one myself. That is what you have to expect if you invent anything
that puts an old machine out of fashion, or solve a problem that has
puzzled all the world up to your time. There never was a religion
founded but its Messiah was called a crank. There never was an idea
started that woke up men out of their stupid indifference but its
originator was spoken of as a crank. Do you want to know why that name
is given to the men who do most for the world's progress? I will tell
you. It is because cranks make all the wheels in all the machinery of
the world go round. What would a steam-engine be without a crank? I
suppose the first fool that looked on the first crank that was ever made
asked what that crooked, queer-looking thing was good for. When the
wheels got moving he found out. Tell us something about that book which
has so much to say concerning cranks."

Hereupon I requested Delilah to carry back Morhof, and replace him in the
wide gap he had left in the bookshelf. She was then to find and bring
down the volume I had been speaking of.

Delilah took the wisdom of the seventeenth century in her arms, and
departed on her errand. The book she brought down was given me some
years ago by a gentleman who had sagaciously foreseen that it was just
one of those works which I might hesitate about buying, but should be
well pleased to own. He guessed well; the book has been a great source
of instruction and entertainment to me. I wonder that so much time and
cost should have been expended upon a work which might have borne a title
like the Encomium Moriae of Erasmus; and yet it is such a wonderful
museum of the productions of the squinting brains belonging to the class
of persons commonly known as cranks that we could hardly spare one of its
five hundred octavo pages.

Those of us who are in the habit of receiving letters from all sorts of
would-be-literary people--letters of inquiry, many of them with reference
to matters we are supposed to understand--can readily see how it was that
Mr. De Morgan, never too busy to be good-natured with the people who
pestered--or amused-him with their queer fancies, received such a number
of letters from persons who thought they had made great discoveries, from
those who felt that they and their inventions and contrivances had been
overlooked, and who sought in his large charity of disposition and great
receptiveness a balm for their wounded feelings and a ray of hope for
their darkened prospects.

The book before us is made up from papers published in "The Athenaeum,"
with additions by the author. Soon after opening it we come to names
with which we are familiar, the first of these, that of Cornelius
Agrippa, being connected with the occult and mystic doctrines dealt with
by many of De Morgan's correspondents. But the name most likely to
arrest us is that of Giordano Bruno, the same philosopher, heretic, and
martyr whose statue has recently been erected in Rome, to the great
horror of the Pope and his prelates in the Old World and in the New. De
Morgan's pithy account of him will interest the company: "Giordano Bruno
was all paradox. He was, as has been said, a vorticist before Descartes,
an optimist before Leibnitz, a Copernican before Galileo. It would be
easy to collect a hundred strange opinions of his. He was born about
1550, and was roasted alive at Rome, February 17, 1600, for the
maintenance and defence of the Holy Church, and the rights and liberties
of the same."

Number Seven could not contain himself when the reading had reached this
point. He rose from his chair, and tinkled his spoon against the side of
his teacup. It may have been a fancy, but I thought it returned a sound
which Mr. Richard Briggs would have recognized as implying an organic
defect. But Number Seven did not seem to notice it, or, if he did, to
mind it.

"Why did n't we all have a chance to help erect that statue?" he cried.
"A murdered heretic at the beginning of the seventeenth century, a hero
of knowledge in the nineteenth,--I drink to the memory of the roasted
crank, Giordano Bruno!"

Number Seven lifted his teacup to his lips, and most of us followed his
example.

After this outburst of emotion and eloquence had subsided, and the
teaspoons lay quietly in their saucers, I went on with my extract from
the book I had in hand.

I think, I said, that the passage which follows will be new and
instructive to most of the company. De Morgan's interpretation of the
cabalistic sentence, made up as you will find it, is about as ingenious a
piece of fanciful exposition as you will be likely to meet with anywhere
in any book, new or old. I am the more willing to mention it as it
suggests a puzzle which some of the company may like to work upon.
Observe the character and position of the two distinguished philosophers
who did not think their time thrown away in laboring at this seemingly
puerile task.

"There is a kind of Cabbala Alphabetica which the investigators of the
numerals in words would do well to take up; it is the formation of
sentences which contain all the letters of the alphabet, and each only
once. No one has done it with v and j treated as consonants; but you and
I can do it. Dr. Whewell and I amused ourselves some years ago with
attempts. He could not make sense, though he joined words he gave me
Phiz, styx, wrong, buck, flame, quiz.

"I gave him the following, which he agreed was 'admirable sense,'--I
certainly think the words would never have come together except in this
way: I quartz pyx who fling muck beds. I long thought that no human
being could say this under any circumstances. At last I happened to be
reading a religious writer,--as he thought himself,--who threw aspersions
on his opponents thick and threefold. Heyday came into my head; this
fellow flings muck beds; he must be a quartz pyx. And then I remembered
that a pyx is a sacred vessel, and quartz is a hard stone, as hard as the
heart of a religious foe-curser. So that the line is the motto of the
ferocious sectarian who turns his religious vessels into mud-holders, for
the benefit of those who will not see what he sees."

"There are several other sentences given, in which all the letters
(except v and j as consonants) are employed, of which the following is
the best: Get nymph; quiz sad brow; fix luck,--which in more sober
English would be, Marry; be cheerful; watch your business. There is more
edification, more religion, in this than in all the 666 interpretations
put together."

There is something very pleasant in the thought of these two sages
playing at jackstraws with the letters of the alphabet. The task which
De Morgan and Dr. Whewell, "the omniscient," set themselves would not be
unworthy of our own ingenious scholars, and it might be worth while for
some one of our popular periodicals to offer a prize for the best
sentence using up the whole alphabet, under the same conditions as those
submitted to by our two philosophers.

This whole book of De Morgan's seems to me full of instruction. There is
too much of it, no doubt; yet one can put up with the redundancy for the
sake of the multiplicity of shades of credulity and self-deception it
displays in broad daylight. I suspect many of us are conscious of a
second personality in our complex nature, which has many traits
resembling those found in the writers of the letters addressed to Mr. De
Horgan.

I have not ventured very often nor very deeply into the field of
metaphysics, but if I were disposed to make any claim in that direction,
it would be the recognition of the squinting brain, the introduction of
the term "cerebricity" corresponding to electricity, the idiotic area in
the brain or thinking-marrow, and my studies of the second member in the
partnership of I-My-Self & Co. I add the Co. with especial reference to
a very interesting article in a late Scribner, by my friend Mr. William
James. In this article the reader will find a full exposition of the
doctrine of plural personality illustrated by striking cases. I have
long ago noticed and referred to the fact of the stratification of the
currents of thought in three layers, one over the other. I have
recognized that where there are two individuals talking together there
are really six personalities engaged in the conversation. But the
distinct, separable, independent individualities, taking up conscious
life one after the other, are brought out by Mr. James and the
authorities to which he refers as I have not elsewhere seen them
developed.

Whether we shall ever find the exact position of the idiotic centre or
area in the brain (if such a spot exists) is uncertain. We know exactly
where the blind spot of the eye is situated, and can demonstrate it
anatomically and physiologically. But we have only analogy to lead us to
infer the possible or even probable existence of an insensible spot in
the thinking-centre. If there is a focal point where consciousness is at
its highest development, it would not be strange if near by there should
prove to be an anaesthetic district or limited space where no report from
the senses was intelligently interpreted. But all this is mere
hypothesis.

Notwithstanding the fact that I am nominally the head personage of the
circle of Teacups, I do not pretend or wish to deny that we all look to
Number Five as our chief adviser in all the literary questions that come
before us. She reads more and better than any of us. She is always
ready to welcome the first sign of genius, or of talent which approaches
genius. She makes short work with all the pretenders whose only excuse
for appealing to the public is that they "want to be famous." She is one
of the very few persons to whom I am willing to read any one of my own
productions while it is yet in manuscript, unpublished. I know she is
disposed to make more of it than it deserves; but, on the other hand,
there are degrees in her scale of judgment, and I can distinguish very
easily what delights her from what pleases only, or is, except for her
kindly feeling to the writer, indifferent, or open to severe comment.
What is curious is that she seems to have no literary aspirations, no
desire to be known as a writer. Yet Number Five has more esprit, more
sparkle, more sense in her talk, than many a famous authoress from whom
we should expect brilliant conversation.

There are mysteries about Number Five. I am not going to describe her
personally. Whether she belongs naturally among the bright young people,
or in the company of the maturer persons, who have had a good deal of
experience of the world, and have reached the wisdom of the riper decades
without losing the graces of the earlier ones, it would be hard to say.
The men and women, young and old, who throng about her forget their own
ages. "There is no such thing as time in her presence," said the
Professor, the other day, in speaking of her. Whether the Professor is in
love with her or not is more than I can say, but I am sure that he goes
to her for literary sympathy and counsel, just as I do. The reader may
remember what Number Five said about the possibility of her getting a
sprained ankle, and her asking the young Doctor whether he felt equal to
taking charge of her if she did. I would not for the world insinuate
that he wishes she would slip and twist her foot a little,--just a
little, you know, but so that it would have to be laid on a pillow in a
chair, and inspected, and bandaged, and delicately manipulated. There
was a banana-skin which she might naturally have trodden on, in her way
to the tea-table. Nobody can suppose that it was there except by the
most innocent of accidents. There are people who will suspect everybody.
The idea of the Doctor's putting that banana-skin there! People love to
talk in that silly way about doctors.

Number Five had promised to read us a narrative which she thought would
interest some of the company. Who wrote it she did not tell us, but I
inferred from various circumstances that she had known the writer. She
read the story most effectively in her rich, musical voice. I noticed
that when it came to the sounds of the striking clock, the ringing of the
notes was so like that which reaches us from some far-off cathedral tower
that we wanted to bow our heads, as if we had just heard a summons to the
Angelus. This was the short story that Number Five read to The
Teacups:--

I have somewhere read this anecdote. Louis the Fourteenth was looking
out, one day, from, a window of his palace of Saint-Germain. It was a
beautiful landscape which spread out before him, and the monarch,
exulting in health, strength, and the splendors of his exalted position,
felt his bosom swell with emotions of pride and happiness: Presently he
noticed the towers of a church in the distance, above the treetops.
"What building is that?" he asked. "May it please your Majesty, that is
the Church of St. Denis, where your royal ancestors have been buried for
many generations." The answer did not "please his Royal Majesty."
There, then, was the place where he too was to lie and moulder in the
dust. He turned, sick at heart, from the window, and was uneasy until he
had built him another palace, from which he could never be appalled by
that fatal prospect.

Something like the experience of Louis the Fourteenth was that of the
owner of

        THE TERRIBLE CLOCK.

I give the story as transcribed from the original manuscript:--

The clock was bequeathed to me by an old friend who had recently died.
His mind had been a good deal disordered in the later period of his life.
This clock, I am told; seemed to have a strange fascination for him. His
eyes were fastened on it during the last hours of his life. He died just
at midnight. The clock struck twelve, the nurse told me, as he drew his
last breath, and then, without any known cause, stopped, with both hands
upon the hour.

It is a complex and costly piece of mechanism. The escapement is in
front, so that every tooth is seen as it frees itself. It shows the
phases of the moon, the month of the year, the day of the month, and the
day of the week, as well as the hour and minute of the day.

I had not owned it a week before I began to perceive the same kind of
fascination as that which its former owner had experienced. This
gradually grew upon me, and presently led to trains of thought which
became at first unwelcome, then worrying, and at last unendurable. I
began by taking offence at the moon. I did not like to see that
"something large and smooth and round," so like the skull which little
Peterkin picked up on the field of Blenheim. "How many times," I kept
saying to myself, "is that wicked old moon coming up to stare at me?" I
could not stand it. I stopped a part of the machinery, and the moon went
into permanent eclipse. By and by the sounds of the infernal machine
began to trouble and pursue me. They talked to me; more and more their
language became that of articulately speaking men. They twitted me with
the rapid flight of time. They hurried me, as if I had not a moment to
lose. Quick! Quick! Quick! as each tooth released itself from the
escapement. And as I looked and listened there could not be any mistake
about it. I heard Quick! Quick! Quick! as plainly, at least, as I ever
heard a word from the phonograph. I stood watching the dial one day,--it
was near one o'clock,--and a strange attraction held me fastened to the
spot. Presently something appeared to trip or stumble inside of the
infernal mechanism. I waited for the sound I knew was to follow. How
nervous I got! It seemed to me that it would never strike. At last the
minute-hand reached the highest point of the dial. Then there was a
little stir among the works, as there is in a congregation as it rises to
receive the benediction. It was no form of blessing which rung out those
deep, almost sepulchral tones. But the word they uttered could not be
mistaken. I can hear its prolonged, solemn vibrations as if I were
standing before the clock at this moment.

Gone! Yes, I said to myself, gone,--its record made up to be opened in
eternity.

I stood still, staring vaguely at the dial as in a trance. And as the
next hour creeps stealthily up, it starts all at once, and cries aloud,
Gone!--Gone! The sun sinks lower, the hour-hand creeps downward with it,
until I hear the thrice-repeated monosyllable, Gone!--Gone!--Gone! Soon
through the darkening hours, until at the dead of night the long roll is
called, and with the last Gone! the latest of the long procession that
filled the day follows its ghostly companions into the stillness and
darkness of the past.

I silenced the striking part of the works. Still, the escapement kept
repeating, Quick! Quick! Quick! Still the long minute-hand, like the
dart in the grasp of Death, as we see it in Roubiliac's monument to Mrs.
Nightingale, among the tombs of Westminster Abbey, stretched itself out,
ready to transfix each hour as it passed, and make it my last. I sat by
the clock to watch the leap from one day of the week to the next. Then
would come, in natural order, the long stride from one month to the
following one.

I could endure it no longer. "Take that clock away!" I said. They took
it away. They took me away, too,--they thought I needed country air.
The sounds and motions still pursued me in imagination. I was very
nervous when I came here. The walks are pleasant, but the walls seem to
me unnecessarily high. The boarders are numerous; a little
miscellaneous, I think. But we have the Queen, and the President of the
United States, and several other distinguished persons, if we may trust
what they tell about themselves.

After we had listened to Number Five's story, I was requested to read a
couple of verses written by me when the guest of my friends, whose name
is hinted by the title prefixed to my lines.

        LA MAISON D'OR.

        BAR HARBOR.

   From this fair home behold on either side
   The restful mountains or the restless sea:
   So the warm sheltering walls of life divide
   Time and its tides from still eternity.

   Look on the waves: their stormy voices teach
   That not on earth may toil and struggle cease.
   Look on the mountains: better far than speech
   Their silent promise of eternal peace.




VIII.

I had intended to devote this particular report to an account of my
replies to certain questions which have been addressed to me,--questions
which I have a right to suppose interest the public, and which,
therefore, I was justified in bringing before The Teacups, and presenting
to the readers of these articles.

Some may care for one of these questions, and some for another. A good
many young people think nothing about life as it presents itself in the
far horizon, bounded by the snowy ridges of threescore and the dim peaks
beyond that remote barrier. Again, there are numbers of persons who know
nothing at all about the Jews; while, on the other hand, there are those
who can, or think they can, detect the Israelitish blood in many of their
acquaintances who believe themselves of the purest Japhetic origin, and
are full of prejudices about the Semitic race.

I do not mean to be cheated out of my intentions. I propose to answer my
questioners on the two points just referred to, but I find myself so much
interested in the personal affairs of The Teacups that I must deal with
them before attacking those less exciting subjects. There is no use, let
me say here, in addressing to me letters marked "personal," "private,"
"confidential," and so forth, asking me how I came to know what happened
in certain conversations of which I shall give a partial account. If
there is a very sensitive phonograph lying about here and there in
unsuspected corners, that might account for some part of my revelations.
If Delilah, whose hearing is of almost supernatural delicacy, reports to
me what she overhears, it might explain a part of the mystery. I do not
want to accuse Delilah, but a young person who assures me she can hear my
watch ticking in my pocket, when I am in the next room, might undoubtedly
tell many secrets, if so disposed. Number Five is pretty nearly
omniscient, and she and I are on the best terms with each other. These
are all the hints I shall give you at present.

The Teacups of whom the least has been heard at our table are the Tutor
and the Musician. The Tutor is a modest young man, kept down a little, I
think, by the presence of older persons, like the Professor and myself.
I have met him several times, of late, walking with different lady
Teacups: once with the American Annex; twice with the English Annex; once
with the two Annexes together; once with Number Five.

I have mentioned the fact that the Tutor is a poet as among his claims to
our attention. I must add that I do not think any the worse of him for
expressing his emotions and experiences in verse. For though rhyming is
often a bad sign in a young man, especially if he is already out of his
teens, there are those to whom it is as natural, one might almost say as
necessary, as it is to a young bird to fly. One does not care to see
barnyard fowls tumbling about in trying to use their wings. They have a
pair of good, stout drumsticks, and had better keep to them, for the most
part. But that feeling does not apply to young eagles, or even to young
swallows and sparrows. The Tutor is by no means one of those ignorant,
silly, conceited phrase-tinklers, who live on the music of their own
jingling syllables and the flattery of their foolish friends. I think
Number Five must appreciate him. He is sincere, warmhearted,--his poetry
shows that,--not in haste to be famous, and he looks to me as if he only
wanted love to steady him. With one of those two young girls he ought
certainly to be captivated, if he is not already. Twice walking with the
English Annex, I met him, and they were so deeply absorbed in
conversation they hardly noticed me. He has been talking over the matter
with Number Five, who is just the kind of person for a confidante.

"I know I feel very lonely," he was saying, "and I only wish I felt sure
that I could make another person happy. My life would be transfigured if
I could find such a one, whom I could love well enough to give my life to
her,--for her, if that were needful, and who felt an affinity for me, if
any one could."

"And why not your English maiden?" said Number Five.

"What makes you think I care more for her than for her American friend?"
said the Tutor.

"Why, have n't I met you walking with her, and did n't you both seem
greatly interested in the subject you were discussing? I thought, of
course, it was something more or less sentimental that you were talking
about."

"I was explaining that 'enclitic de' in Browning's Grammarian's Funeral.
I don't think there was anything very sentimental about that. She is an
inquisitive creature, that English girl. She is very fond of asking me
questions,--in fact, both of them are. There is one curious difference
between them: the English girl settles down into her answers and is
quiet; the American girl is never satisfied with yesterday's conclusions;
she is always reopening old questions in the light of some new fact or
some novel idea. I suppose that people bred from childhood to lean their
backs against the wall of the Creed and the church catechism find it hard
to sit up straight on the republican stool, which obliges them to stiffen
their own backs. Which of these two girls would be the safest choice for
a young man? I should really like to hear what answer you would make if I
consulted you seriously, with a view to my own choice,--on the
supposition that there was a fair chance that either of them might be
won."

"The one you are in love with," answered Number Five.

"But what if it were a case of 'How happy could I be with either'? Which
offers the best chance of happiness,--a marriage between two persons of
the same country, or a marriage where one of the parties is of foreign
birth? Everything else being equal, which is best for an American to
marry, an American or an English girl? We need not confine the question
to those two young persons, but put it more generally."

"There are reasons on both sides," answered Number Five. "I have often
talked this matter over with The Dictator. This is the way he speaks
about it. English blood is apt to tell well on the stock upon which it
is engrafted. Over and over again he has noticed finely grown specimens
of human beings, and on inquiry has found that one or both of the parents
or grandparents were of British origin. The chances are that the
descendants of the imported stock will be of a richer organization, more
florid, more muscular, with mellower voices, than the native whose blood
has been unmingled with that of new emigrants since the earlier colonial
times.--So talks The Dictator.--I myself think the American will find his
English wife concentrates herself more readily and more exclusively on
her husband,--for the obvious reason that she is obliged to live mainly
in him. I remember hearing an old friend of my early days say, 'A woman
does not bear transplanting.' It does not do to trust these old sayings,
and yet they almost always have some foundation in the experience of
mankind, which has repeated them from generation to generation. Happy is
the married woman of foreign birth who can say to her husband, as
Andromache said to Hector, after enumerating all the dear relatives she
had lost,

  "'Yet while my hector still survives,
   I see My father, mother, brethren, all in thee!'

"How many a sorrowing wife, exiled from her native country, dreams of the
mother she shall see no more! How many a widow, in a strange land,
wishes that her poor, worn-out body could be laid among her kinsfolk, in
the little churchyard where she used to gather daisies in her childhood!
It takes a great deal of love to keep down the 'climbing sorrow' that
swells up in a woman's throat when such memories seize upon her, in her
moments of desolation. But if a foreign-born woman does willingly give
up all for a man, and never looks backward, like Lot's wife, she is a
prize that it is worth running a risk to gain,--that is, if she has the
making of a good woman in her; and a few years will go far towards
naturalizing her."

The Tutor listened to Number Five with much apparent interest. "And
now," he said, "what do you think of her companion?"

"A charming girl for a man of a quiet, easy temperament. The great
trouble is with her voice. It is pitched a full note too high. It is
aggressive, disturbing, and would wear out a nervous man without his ever
knowing what was the matter with him. A good many crazy Northern people
would recover their reason if they could live for a year or two among the
blacks of the Southern States. But the penetrating, perturbing quality
of the voices of many of our Northern women has a great deal to answer
for in the way of determining love and friendship. You remember that
dear friend of ours who left us not long since? If there were more
voices like hers, the world would be a different place to live in. I do
not believe any man or woman ever came within the range of those sweet,
tranquil tones without being hushed, captivated, entranced I might almost
say, by their calming, soothing influence. Can you not imagine the tones
in which those words, 'Peace, be still,' were spoken? Such was the
effect of the voice to which but a few weeks ago we were listening. It
is hard to believe that it has died out of human consciousness. Can such
a voice be spared from that world of happiness to which we fondly look
forward, where we love to dream, if we do not believe with assured
conviction, that whatever is loveliest in this our mortal condition shall
be with us again as an undying possession? Your English friend has a
very agreeable voice, round, mellow, cheery, and her articulation is
charming. Other things being equal, I think you, who are, perhaps,
oversensitive, would live from two to three years longer with her than
with the other. I suppose a man who lived within hearing of a murmuring
brook would find his life shortened if a sawmill were set up within
earshot of his dwelling."

"And so you advise me to make love to the English girl, do you?" asked
the Tutor.

Number Five laughed. It was not a loud laugh, she never laughed noisily;
it was not a very hearty laugh; the idea did not seem to amuse her much.

"No," she said, "I won't take the responsibility. Perhaps this is a case
in which the true reading of Gay's line would be--

     "How happy could I be with neither.

"There are several young women in the world besides our two Annexes."

I question whether the Tutor had asked those questions very seriously,
and I doubt if Number Five thought he was very much in earnest.

One of The Teacups reminded me that I had promised to say something of my
answers to certain questions. So I began at once:

I have given the name of brain-tappers to the literary operatives who
address persons whose names are well known to the public, asking their
opinions or their experiences on subjects which are at the time of
general interest. They expect a literary man or a scientific expert to
furnish them materials for symposia and similar articles, to be used by
them for their own special purposes. Sometimes they expect to pay for
the information furnished them; at other times, the honor of being
included in a list of noted personages who have received similar requests
is thought sufficient compensation. The object with which the
brain-tapper puts his questions may be a purely benevolent and entirely
disinterested one. Such was the object of some of those questions which
I have received and answered. There are other cases, in which the
brain-tapper is acting much as those persons do who stop a physician in
the street to talk with him about their livers or stomachs, or other
internal arrangements, instead of going to his office and consulting him,
expecting to pay for his advice. Others are more like those busy women
who, having the generous intention of making a handsome present to their
pastor, at as little expense as may be, send to all their neighbors and
acquaintances for scraps of various materials, out of which the imposing
"bedspread" or counterpane is to be elaborated.

That is all very well so long as old pieces of stuff are all they call
for, but it is a different matter to ask for clippings out of new and
uncut rolls of cloth. So it is one thing to ask an author for liberty to
use extracts from his published writings, and it is a very different
thing to expect him to write expressly for the editor's or compiler's
piece of literary patchwork.

I have received many questions within the last year or two, some of which
I am willing to answer, but prefer to answer at my own time, in my own
way, through my customary channel of communication with the public. I
hope I shall not be misunderstood as implying any reproach against the
inquirers who, in order to get at facts which ought to be known, apply to
all whom they can reach for information. Their inquisitiveness is not
always agreeable or welcome, but we ought to be glad that there are
mousing fact-hunters to worry us with queries to which, for the sake of
the public, we are bound to give our attention. Let me begin with my
brain-tappers.

And first, as the papers have given publicity to the fact that I, The
Dictator of this tea-table, have reached the age of threescore years and
twenty, I am requested to give information as to how I managed to do it,
and to explain just how they can go and do likewise. I think I can lay
down a few rules that will help them to the desired result. There is no
certainty in these biological problems, but there are reasonable
probabilities upon which it is safe to act.

The first thing to be done is, some years before birth, to advertise for
a couple of parents both belonging to long-lived families. Especially let
the mother come of a race in which octogenarians and nonagenarians are
very common phenomena. There are practical difficulties in following out
this suggestion, but possibly the forethought of your progenitors, or
that concurrence of circumstances which we call accident, may have
arranged this for you.

Do not think that a robust organization is any warrant of long life, nor
that a frail and slight bodily constitution necessarily means scanty
length of days. Many a strong-limbed young man and many a blooming young
woman have I seen failing and dropping away in or before middle life, and
many a delicate and slightly constituted person outliving the athletes
and the beauties of their generation. Whether the excessive development
of the muscular system is compatible with the best condition of general
health is, I think, more than doubtful. The muscles are great sponges
that suck up and make use of large quantities of blood, and the other
organs must be liable to suffer for want of their share.

One of the Seven Wise Men of Greece boiled his wisdom down into two
words,--NOTHING TOO MUCH. It is a rule which will apply to food,
exercise, labor, sleep, and, in short, to every part of life. This is
not so very difficult a matter if one begins in good season and forms
regular habits. But what if I should lay down the rule, Be cheerful;
take all the troubles and trials of life with perfect equanimity and a
smiling countenance? Admirable directions! Your friend, the
curly-haired blonde, with florid complexion, round cheeks, the best
possible digestion and respiration, the stomach of an ostrich and the
lungs of a pearl-diver, finds it perfectly easy to carry them into
practice. You, of leaden complexion, with black and lank hair, lean,
hollow-eyed, dyspeptic, nervous, find it not so easy to be always
hilarious and happy. The truth is that the persons of that buoyant
disposition which comes always heralded by a smile, as a yacht driven by
a favoring breeze carries a wreath of sparkling foam before her, are born
with their happiness ready made. They cannot help being cheerful any
more than their saturnine fellow-mortal can help seeing everything
through the cloud he carries with him. I give you the precept, then, Be
cheerful, for just what it is worth, as I would recommend to you to be
six feet, or at least five feet ten, in stature. You cannot settle that
matter for yourself, but you can stand up straight, and give your five
feet five its--full value. You can help along a little by wearing
high-heeled shoes. So you can do something to encourage yourself in
serenity of aspect and demeanor, keeping your infirmities and troubles in
the background instead of making them the staple of your conversation.
This piece of advice, if followed, may be worth from three to five years
of the fourscore which you hope to attain.

If, on the other hand, instead of going about cheerily in society, making
the best of everything and as far as possible forgetting your troubles,
you can make up your mind to economize all your stores of vital energy,
to hoard your life as a miser hoards his money, you will stand a fair
chance of living until you are tired of life,--fortunate if everybody is
not tired of you.

One of my prescriptions for longevity may startle you somewhat. It is
this: Become the subject of a mortal disease. Let half a dozen doctors
thump you, and knead you, and test you in every possible way, and render
their verdict that you have an internal complaint; they don't know
exactly what it is, but it will certainly kill you by and by. Then bid
farewell to the world and shut yourself up for an invalid. If you are
threescore years old when you begin this mode of life, you may very
probably last twenty years, and there you are,--an octogenarian. In the
mean time, your friends outside have been dropping off, one after
another, until you find yourself almost alone, nursing your mortal
complaint as if it were your baby, hugging it and kept alive by it,--if
to exist is to live. Who has not seen cases like this,--a man or a woman
shutting himself or herself up, visited by a doctor or a succession of
doctors (I remember that once, in my earlier experience, I was the
twenty-seventh physician who had been consulted), always taking medicine,
until everybody was reminded of that impatient speech of a relative of
one of these invalid vampires who live on the blood of tired-out
attendants, "I do wish she would get well--or something"? Persons who
are shut up in that way, confined to their chambers, sometimes to their
beds, have a very small amount of vital expenditure, and wear out very
little of their living substance. They are like lamps with half their
wicks picked down, and will continue to burn when other lamps have used
up all their oil. An insurance office might make money by taking no
risks except on lives of persons suffering from mortal disease. It is on
this principle of economizing the powers of life that a very eminent
American physician,--Dr. Weir Mitchell, a man of genius,--has founded his
treatment of certain cases of nervous exhaustion.

What have I got to say about temperance, the use of animal food, and so
forth? These are questions asked me. Nature has proved a wise teacher,
as I think, in my own case. The older I grow, the less use I make of
alcoholic stimulants. In fact, I hardly meddle with them at all, except
a glass or two of champagne occasionally. I find that by far the best
borne of all drinks containing alcohol. I do not suppose my experience
can be the foundation of a universal rule. Dr. Holyoke, who lived to be
a hundred, used habitually, in moderate quantities, a mixture of cider,
water, and rum. I think, as one grows older, less food, especially less
animal food, is required. But old people have a right to be epicures, if
they can afford it. The pleasures of the palate are among the last
gratifications of the senses allowed them. We begin life as little
cannibals,--feeding on the flesh and blood of our mothers. We range
through all the vegetable and animal products, of nature, and I suppose,
if the second childhood could return to the food of the first, it might
prove a wholesome diet.

What do I say to smoking? I cannot grudge an old man his pipe, but I
think tobacco often does a good deal of harm to the health,--to the eyes
especially, to the nervous system generally, producing headache,
palpitation, and trembling. I myself gave it up many years ago.
Philosophically speaking, I think self-narcotization and
self-alcoholization are rather ignoble substitutes for undisturbed
self-consciousness and unfettered self-control.

Here is another of those brain-tapping letters, of similar character,
which I have no objection to answering at my own time and in the place
which best suits me. As the questions must be supposed to be asked with
a purely scientific and philanthropic purpose, it can make little
difference when and where they are answered. For myself, I prefer our
own tea-table to the symposia to which I am often invited. I do not
quarrel with those who invite their friends to a banquet to which many
strangers are expected to contribute. It is a very easy and pleasant way
of giving an entertainment at little cost and with no responsibility.
Somebody has been writing to me about "Oatmeal and Literature," and
somebody else wants to know whether I have found character influenced by
diet; also whether, in my opinion, oatmeal is preferable to pie as an
American national food.

In answer to these questions, I should say that I have my beliefs and
prejudices; but if I were pressed hard for my proofs of their
correctness, I should make but a poor show in the witness-box. Most
assuredly I do believe that body and mind are much influenced by the kind
of food habitually depended upon. I am persuaded that a too exclusively
porcine diet gives a bristly character to the beard and hair, which is
borrowed from the animal whose tissues these stiff-bearded compatriots of
ours have too largely assimilated. I can never stray among the village
people of our windy capes without now and then coming upon a human being
who looks as if he had been split, salted, and dried, like the salt-fish
which has built up his arid organism. If the body is modified by the
food which nourishes it, the mind and character very certainly will be
modified by it also. We know enough of their close connection with each
other to be sure of that, without any statistical observations to prove
it.

Do you really want to know "whether oatmeal is preferable to pie as an
American national food"? I suppose the best answer I can give to your
question is to tell you what is my own practice. Oatmeal in the morning,
as an architect lays a bed of concrete to form a base for his
superstructure. Pie when I can get it; that is, of the genuine sort, for
I am not patriotic enough to think very highly of the article named after
the Father of his Country, who was first in war, first in peace,--not
first in pies, according to my standard.

There is a very odd prejudice against pie as an article of diet. It is
common to hear every form of bodily degeneracy and infirmity attributed
to this particular favorite food. I see no reason or sense in it. Mr.
Emerson believed in pie, and was almost indignant when a fellow-traveller
refused the slice he offered him. "Why, Mr.________," said be, "what is
pie made for!" If every Green Mountain boy has not eaten a thousand
times his weight in apple, pumpkin, squash, and mince pie, call me a
dumpling. And Colonel Ethan Allen was one of them,--Ethan Allen, who, as
they used to say, could wrench off the head of a wrought nail with his
teeth.

If you mean to keep as well as possible, the less you think about your
health the better. You know enough not to eat or drink what you have
found does not agree with you. You ought to know enough not to expose
yourself needlessly to draughts. If you take a "constitutional," walk
with the wind when you can, and take a closed car against it if you can
get one. Walking against the wind is one of the most dangerous kinds of
exposure, if you are sensitive to cold. But except a few simple rules
such as I have just given, let your health take care of itself so long as
it behaves decently. If you want to be sure not to reach threescore and
twenty, get a little box of homoeopathic pellets and a little book of
homeopathic prescriptions. I had a poor friend who fell into that way,
and became at last a regular Hahnemaniac. He left a box of his little
jokers, which at last came into my hands. The poor fellow had cultivated
symptoms as other people cultivate roses or chrysanthemums. What a
luxury of choice his imagination presented to him! When one watches for
symptoms, every organ in the body is ready to put in its claim. By and
by a real illness attacked him, and the box of little pellets was shut
up, to minister to his fancied evils no longer.

Let me tell you one thing. I think if patients and physicians were in
the habit of recognizing the fact I am going to mention, both would be
gainers. The law I refer to must be familiar to all observing
physicians, and to all intelligent persons who have observed their own
bodily and mental conditions. This is the curve of health. It is a
mistake to suppose that the normal state of health is represented by a
straight horizontal line. Independently of the well-known causes which
raise or depress the standard of vitality, there seems to be,--I think I
may venture to say there is,--a rhythmic undulation in the flow of the
vital force. The "dynamo" which furnishes the working powers of
consciousness and action has its annual, its monthly, its diurnal waves,
even its momentary ripples, in the current it furnishes. There are
greater and lesser curves in the movement of every day's life,--a series
of ascending and descending movements, a periodicity depending on the
very nature of the force at work in the living organism. Thus we have
our good seasons and our bad seasons, our good days and our bad days,
life climbing and descending in long or short undulations, which I have
called the curve of health.

From this fact spring a great proportion of the errors of medical
practice. On it are based the delusions of the various shadowy systems
which impose themselves on the ignorant and half-learned public as
branches or "schools" of science. A remedy taken at the time of the
ascent in the curve of health is found successful. The same remedy taken
while the curve is in its downward movement proves a failure.

So long as this biological law exists, so long the charlatan will keep
his hold on the ignorant public. So long as it exists, the wisest
practitioner will be liable to deceive himself about the effect of what
he calls and loves to think are his remedies. Long-continued and
sagacious observation will to some extent undeceive him; but were it not
for the happy illusion that his useless or even deleterious drugs were
doing good service, many a practitioner would give up his calling for one
in which he could be more certain that he was really being useful to the
subjects of his professional dealings. For myself, I should prefer a
physician of a sanguine temperament, who had a firm belief in himself and
his methods. I do not wonder at all that the public support a whole
community of pretenders who show the portraits of the patients they have
"cured." The best physicians will tell you that, though many patients
get well under their treatment, they rarely cure anybody. If you are
told also that the best physician has many more patients die on his hands
than the worst of his fellow-practitioners, you may add these two
statements to your bundle of paradoxes, and if they puzzle you I will
explain them at some future time.

[I take this opportunity of correcting a statement now going the rounds
of the medical and probably other periodicals. In "The Journal of the
American Medical Association," dated April 26,1890, published at Chicago,
I am reported, in quotation marks, as saying, "Give me opium, wine, and
milk, and I will cure all diseases to which flesh is heir."

In the first place, I never said I will cure, or can cure, or would or
could cure, or had cured any disease. My venerated instructor, Dr. James
Jackson, taught me never to use that expression. Curo means, I take care
of, he used to say, and in that sense, if you mean nothing more, it is
properly employed. So, in the amphitheatre of the Ecole de Medecine, I
used to read the words of Ambroise Pare, "Je le pansay, Dieu le guarist."
(I dressed his wound, and God cured him.) Next, I am not in the habit of
talking about "the diseases to which flesh is heir." The expression has
become rather too familiar for repetition, and belongs to the rhetoric of
other latitudes. And, lastly, I have said some plain things, perhaps
some sharp ones, about the abuse of drugs and the limited number of
vitally important remedies, but I am not so ignorantly presumptuous as to
make the foolish statement falsely attributed to me.]

I paused a minute or two, and as no one spoke out; I put a question to
the Counsellor.

Are you quite sure that you wish to live to be threescore and twenty
years old?

"Most certainly I do. Don't they say that Theophrastus lived to his
hundred and seventh year, and did n't he complain of the shortness of
life? At eighty a man has had just about time to get warmly settled in
his nest. Do you suppose he doesn't enjoy the quiet of that
resting-place? No more haggard responsibility to keep him awake
nights,--unless he prefers to retain his hold on offices and duties from
which he can be excused if he chooses. No more goading ambitions,--he
knows he has done his best. No more jealousies, if he were weak enough
to feel such ignoble stirrings in his more active season. An
octogenarian with a good record, and free from annoying or distressing
infirmities, ought to be the happiest of men. Everybody treats him with
deference. Everybody wants to help him. He is the ward of the
generations that have grown up since he was in the vigor of maturity.
Yes, let me live to be fourscore years, and then I will tell you whether
I should like a few more years or not."

You carry the feelings of middle age, I said, in imagination, over into
the period of senility, and then reason and dream about it as if its
whole mode of being were like that of the earlier period of life. But how
many things there are in old age which you must live into if you would
expect to have any "realizing sense" of their significance! In the first
place, you have no coevals, or next to none. At fifty, your vessel is
stanch, and you are on deck with the rest, in all weathers. At sixty,
the vessel still floats, and you are in the cabin. At seventy, you, with
a few fellow-passengers, are on a raft. At eighty, you are on a spars to
which, possibly, one, or two, or three friends of about your own age are
still clinging. After that, you must expect soon to find yourself alone,
if you are still floating, with only a life-preserver to keep your old
white-bearded chin above the water.

Kindness? Yes, pitying kindness, which is a bitter sweet in which the
amiable ingredient can hardly be said to predominate. How pleasant do
you think it is to have an arm offered to you when you are walking on a
level surface, where there is no chance to trip? How agreeable do you
suppose it is to have your well-meaning friends shout and screech at you,
as if you were deaf as an adder, instead of only being, as you insist,
somewhat hard of hearing? I was a little over twenty years old when I
wrote the lines which some of you may have met with, for they have been
often reprinted:

     The mossy marbles rest
     On the lips that he has prest
        In their bloom,
     And the names he loved to hear
     Have been carved for many a year
        On the tomb.

The world was a garden to me then; it is a churchyard now.

"I thought you were one of those who looked upon old age cheerfully, and
welcomed it as a season of peace and contented enjoyment."

I am one of those who so regard it. Those are not bitter or scalding
tears that fall from my eyes upon "the mossy marbles." The young who
left my side early in my life's journey are still with me in the
unchanged freshness and beauty of youth. Those who have long kept
company with me live on after their seeming departure, were it only by
the mere force of habit; their images are all around me, as if every
surface had been a sensitive film that photographed them; their voices
echo about me, as if they had been recorded on those unforgetting
cylinders which bring back to us the tones and accents that have
imprinted them, as the hardened sands show us the tracks of extinct
animals. The melancholy of old age has a divine tenderness in it, which
only the sad experiences of life can lend a human soul. But there is a
lower level,--that of tranquil contentment and easy acquiescence in the
conditions in which we find ourselves; a lower level, in which old age
trudges patiently when it is not using its wings. I say its wings, for
no period of life is so imaginative as that which looks to younger people
the most prosaic. The atmosphere of memory is one in which imagination
flies more easily and feels itself more at home than in the thinner ether
of youthful anticipation. I have told you some of the drawbacks of age;
I would not have you forget its privileges. When it comes down from its
aerial excursions, it has much left to enjoy on the humble plane of
being. And so you think you would like to become an octogenarian? "I
should," said the Counsellor, now a man in the high noon of bodily and
mental vigor. "Four more--yes, five more--decades would not be too much,
I think. And how much I should live to see in that time! I am glad you
have laid down some rules by which a man may reasonably expect to leap
the eight barred gate. I won't promise to obey them all, though."

Among the questions addressed to me, as to a large number of other
persons, are the following. I take them from "The American Hebrew" of
April 4, 1890. I cannot pretend to answer them all, but I can say
something about one or two of them.

"I. Can you, of your own personal experience, find any justification
whatever for the entertainment of prejudice towards individuals solely
because they are Jews?

"II. Is this prejudice not due largely to the religious instruction that
is given by the church acid Sunday-school? For instance, the teachings
that the Jews crucified Jesus; that they rejected him, and can only
secure salvation by belief in him, and similar matters that are
calculated to excite in the impressionable mind of the child an aversion,
if not a loathing, for members of 'the despised race.'

"III. Have you observed in the social or business life of the Jew, so
far as your personal experience has gone, any different standard of
conduct than prevails among Christians of the same social status?

"IV. Can you suggest what should be done to dispel the existing
prejudice?"

As to the first question, I have had very slight acquaintance with the
children of Israel. I shared more or less the prevailing prejudices
against the persecuted race. I used to read in my hymn-book,--I hope I
quote correctly,--

       "See what a living stone
        The builders did refuse!
        Yet God has built his church thereon,
        In spite of envious Jews."

I grew up inheriting the traditional idea that they were a race lying
under a curse for their obstinacy in refusing the gospel. Like other
children of New England birth, I walked in the narrow path of Puritan
exclusiveness. The great historical church of Christendom was presented
to me as Bunyan depicted it: one of the two giants sitting at the door of
their caves, with the bones, of pilgrims scattered about them, and
grinning at the travellers whom they could no longer devour. In the
nurseries of old-fashioned Orthodoxy there was one religion in the
world,--one religion, and a multitude of detestable, literally damnable
impositions, believed in by uncounted millions, who were doomed to
perdition for so believing. The Jews were the believers in one of these
false religions. It had been true once, but was now a pernicious and
abominable lie. The principal use of the Jews seemed to be to lend
money, and to fulfil the predictions of the old prophets of their race.

No doubt the individual sons of Abraham whom we found in our ill-favored
and ill-flavored streets were apt to be unpleasing specimens of the race.
It was against the most adverse influences of legislation, of religious
feeling, of social repugnance, that the great names of Jewish origin made
themselves illustrious; that the philosophers, the musicians, the
financiers, the statesmen, of the last centuries forced the world to
recognize and accept them. Benjamin, the son of Isaac, a son of Israel,
as his family name makes obvious, has shown how largely Jewish blood has
been represented in the great men and women of modern days.

There are two virtues which Christians have found it very hard to
exemplify in practice. These are modesty and civility. The Founder of
the Christian religion appeared among a people accustomed to look for a
Messiah, a special ambassador from heaven, with an authoritative message.
They were intimately acquainted with every expression having reference to
this divine messenger. They had a religion of their own, about which
Christianity agrees with Judaism in asserting that it was of divine
origin. It is a serious fact, to which we do not give all the attention
it deserves, that this divinely instructed people were not satisfied with
the evidence that the young Rabbi who came to overthrow their ancient
church and found a new one was a supernatural being. "We think he was a
great Doctor," said a Jewish companion with whom I was conversing. He
meant a great Teacher, I presume, though healing the sick was one of his
special offices. Instead of remembering that they were entitled to form
their own judgment of the new Teacher, as they had judged of Hillel and
other great instructors, Christians, as they called themselves, have
insulted, calumniated, oppressed, abased, outraged, "the chosen race"
during the long succession of centuries since the Jewish contemporaries
of the Founder of Christianity made up their minds that he did not meet
the conditions required by the subject of the predictions of their
Scriptures. The course of the argument against them is very briefly and
effectively stated by Mr. Emerson:

"This was Jehovah come down out of heaven. I will kill you if you say he
was a man."

It seems as if there should be certain laws of etiquette regulating the
relation of different religions to each other. It is not civil for a
follower of Mahomet to call his neighbor of another creed a "Christian
dog." Still more, there should be something like politeness in the
bearing of Christian sects toward each other, and of believers in the new
dispensation toward those who still adhere to the old. We are in the
habit of allowing a certain arrogant assumption to our Roman Catholic
brethren. We have got used to their pretensions. They may call us
"heretics," if they like. They may speak of us as "infidels," if they
choose, especially if they say it in Latin. So long as there is no
inquisition, so long as there is no auto da fe, we do not mind the hard
words much; and we have as good phrases to give them back: the Man of Sin
and the Scarlet Woman will serve for examples. But it is better to be
civil to each other all round. I doubt if a convert to the religion of
Mahomet was ever made by calling a man a Christian dog. I doubt if a
Hebrew ever became a good Christian if the baptismal rite was performed
by spitting on his Jewish gabardine. I have often thought of the advance
in comity and true charity shown in the title of my late honored friend
James Freeman Clarke's book, "The Ten Great Religions." If the creeds of
mankind try to understand each other before attempting mutual
extermination, they will be sure to find a meaning in beliefs which are
different from their own. The old Calvinistic spirit was almost savagely
exclusive. While the author of the "Ten Great Religions" was growing up
in Boston under the benignant, large-minded teachings of the Rev. James
Freeman, the famous Dr. John M. Mason, at New York, was fiercely
attacking the noble humanity of "The Universal Prayer." "In preaching,"
says his biographer, "he once quoted Pope's lines as to God's being
adored alike 'by saint, by savage, and by sage,' and pronounced it (in
his deepest guttural) 'the most damnable lie.'"

What could the Hebrew expect when a Christian preacher could use such
language about a petition breathing the very soul of humanity? Happily,
the true human spirit is encroaching on that arrogant and narrow-minded
form of selfishness which called itself Christianity.

The golden rule should govern us in dealing with those whom we call
unbelievers, with heathen, and with all who do not accept our religious
views. The Jews are with us as a perpetual lesson to teach us modesty
and civility. The religion we profess is not self-evident. It did not
convince the people to whom it was sent. We have no claim to take it for
granted that we are all right, and they are all wrong. And, therefore,
in the midst of all the triumphs of Christianity, it is well that the
stately synagogue should lift its walls by the side of the aspiring
cathedral, a perpetual reminder that there are many mansions in the
Father's earthly house as well as in the heavenly one; that civilized
humanity, longer in time and broader in space than any historical form of
belief, is mightier than any one institution or organization it includes.

Many years ago I argued with myself the proposition which my Hebrew
correspondent has suggested. Recognizing the fact that I was born to a
birthright of national and social prejudices against "the chosen
people,"--chosen as the object of contumely and abuse by the rest of the
world,--I pictured my own inherited feelings of aversion in all their
intensity, and the strain of thought under the influence of which those
prejudices gave way to a more human, a more truly Christian feeling of
brotherhood. I must ask your indulgence while I quote a few verses from
a poem of my own, printed long ago under the title "At the Pantomime."

I was crowded between two children of Israel, and gave free inward
expression to my feelings. All at once I happened to look more closely
at one of my neighbors, and saw that the youth was the very ideal of the
Son of Mary.

   A fresh young cheek whose olive hue
   The mantling blood shows faintly through;
   Locks dark as midnight, that divide
   And shade the neck on either side;
   Soft, gentle, loving eyes that gleam
   Clear as a starlit mountain stream;
   So looked that other child of Shem,
   The Maiden's Boy of Bethlehem!

   --And thou couldst scorn the peerless blood
   That flows unmingled from the Flood,
   Thy scutcheon spotted with the stains
   Of Norman thieves and pirate Danes!
   The New World's foundling, in thy pride
   Scowl on the Hebrew at thy side,
   And lo! the very semblance there
   The Lord of Glory deigned to wear!

   I see that radiant image rise,
   The flowing hair, the pitying eyes,
   The faintly crimsoned cheek that shows
   The blush of Sharon's opening rose,
   Thy hands would clasp his hallowed feet
   Whose brethren soil thy Christian seat,
   Thy lips would press his garment's hem
   That curl in wrathful scorn for them!

   A sudden mist, a watery screen,
   Dropped like a veil before the scene;
   The shadow floated from my soul,
   And to my lips a whisper stole:
   --Thy prophets caught the Spirit's flame,
   From thee the Son of Mary came,
   With thee the Father deigned to dwell,
   Peace be upon thee, Israel!

It is not to be expected that intimate relations will be established
between Jewish and Christian communities until both become so far
rationalized and humanized that their differences are comparatively
unimportant. But already there is an evident approximation in the
extreme left of what is called liberal Christianity and the
representatives of modern Judaism. The life of a man like the late Sir
Moses Montefiore reads a lesson from the Old Testament which might well
have been inspired by the noblest teachings of the Christian Gospels.

     Delilah, and how she got her name.

Est-elle bien gentille, cette petite? I said one day to Number Five, as
our pretty Delilah put her arm between us with a bunch of those tender
early radishes that so recall the rosy-fingered morning of Homer. The
little hand which held the radishes would not have shamed Aurora. That
hand has never known drudgery, I feel sure.

When I spoke those French words our little Delilah gave a slight,
seemingly involuntary start, and her cheeks grew of as bright a red as
her radishes. Ah, said I to myself; does that young girl understand
French? It may be worth while to be careful what one says before her.

There is a mystery about this girl. She seems to know her place
perfectly,--except, perhaps, when she burst out crying, the other day,
which was against all the rules of table-maiden's etiquette,--and yet she
looks as if she had been born to be waited on, and not to perform that
humble service for others. We know that once in a while girls with
education and well connected take it into their heads to go into service
for a few weeks or months. Sometimes it is from economic motives,--to
procure means for their education, or to help members of their families
who need assistance. At any rate, they undertake the lighter menial
duties of some household where they are not known, and, having
stooped--if stooping it is to be considered--to lowly offices, no born
and bred servants are more faithful to all their obligations. You must
not suppose she was christened Delilah. Any of our ministers would
hesitate to give such a heathen name to a Christian child.

The way she came to get it was this: The Professor was going to give a
lecture before an occasional audience, one evening. When he took his
seat with the other Teacups, the American Annex whispered to the other
Annex, "His hair wants cutting,--it looks like fury." "Quite so," said
the English Annex. "I wish you would tell him so,--I do, awfully."
"I'll fix it," said the American girl. So, after the teacups were
emptied and the company had left the table, she went up to the Professor.
"You read this lecture, don't you, Professor?" she said. "I do," he
answered. "I should think that lock of hair which falls down over your
forehead would trouble you," she said. "It does sometimes," replied the
Professor. "Let our little maid trim it for you. You're equal to that,
aren't you?" turning to the handmaiden. "I always used to cut my father's
hair," she answered. She brought a pair of glittering shears, and before
she would let the Professor go she had trimmed his hair and beard as they
had not been dealt with for many a day. Everybody said the Professor
looked ten years younger. After that our little handmaiden was always
called Delilah, among the talking Teacups.

The Mistress keeps a watchful eye on this young girl. I should not be
surprised to find that she was carrying out some ideal, some fancy or
whim,--possibly nothing more, but springing from some generous, youthful
impulse. Perhaps she is working for that little sister at the Blind
Asylum. Where did she learn French? She did certainly blush, and
betrayed every sign of understanding the words spoken about her in that
language. Sometimes she sings while at her work, and we have all been
struck with the pure, musical character of her voice. It is just such a
voice as ought to come from that round white throat. We made a discovery
about it the other evening.

The Mistress keeps a piano in her room, and we have sometimes had music
in the evening. One of The Teacups, to whom I have slightly referred, is
an accomplished pianist, and the two Annexes sing very sweetly
together,--the American girl having a clear soprano voice, the English
girl a mellow contralto. They had sung several tunes, when the Mistress
rang for Avis,--for that is our Delilah's real name. She whispered to
the young girl, who blushed and trembled. "Don't be frightened," said the
Mistress encouragingly. "I have heard you singing 'Too Young for Love,'
and I will get our pianist to play it. The young ladies both know it,
and you must join in."

The two voices, with the accompaniment, had hardly finished the first
line when a pure, ringing, almost childlike voice joined the vocal duet.
The sound of her own voice seemed to make her forget her fears, and she
warbled as naturally and freely as any young bird of a May morning.
Number Five came in while she was singing, and when she got through
caught her in her arms and kissed her, as if she were her sister, and not
Delilah, our table-maid. Number Five is apt to forget herself and those
social differences to which some of us attach so much importance. This
is the song in which the little maid took part:

     TOO YOUNG FOR LOVE.

     Too young for love?
     Ah, say not so!
   Tell reddening rose-buds not to blow!
   Wait not for spring to pass away,
   --Love's summer months begin with May!
     Too young for love?
     Ah, say not so!
     Too young? Too young?
     Ah, no! no! no!

     Too young for love?
     Ah, say not so,
   While daisies bloom and tulips glow!
   June soon will come with lengthened day
   To practise all love learned in May.
     Too young for love?
     Ah, say not so!
     Too young? Too young?
     Ah, no! no! no!




IX

I often wish that our Number Seven could have known and corresponded with
the author of "The Budget of Paradoxes." I think Mr. De Morgan would
have found some of his vagaries and fancies not undeserving of a place in
his wonderful collection of eccentricities, absurdities,
ingenuities,--mental freaks of all sorts. But I think he would have now
and then recognized a sound idea, a just comparison, a suggestive hint, a
practical notion, which redeemed a page of extravagances and crotchety
whims. I confess that I am often pleased with fancies of his, and should
be willing to adopt them as my own. I think he has, in the midst of his
erratic and tangled conceptions, some perfectly clear and consistent
trains of thought.

So when Number Seven spoke of sending us a paper, I welcomed the
suggestion. I asked him whether he had any objection to my looking it
over before he read it. My proposal rather pleased him, I thought, for,
as was observed on a former occasion, he has in connection with a belief
in himself another side,--a curious self-distrust. I have no question
that he has an obscure sense of some mental deficiency. Thus you may
expect from him first a dogma, and presently a doubt. If you fight his
dogma, he will do battle for it stoutly; if you let him alone, he will
very probably explain its extravagances, if it has any, and tame it into
reasonable limits. Sometimes he is in one mood, sometimes in another.

The first portion of what we listened to shows him at his best; in the
latter part I am afraid you will think he gets a little wild.

I proceed to lay before you the paper which Number Seven read to The
Teacups. There was something very pleasing in the deference which was
shown him. We all feel that there is a crack in the teacup, and are
disposed to handle it carefully. I have left out a few things which he
said, feeling that they might give offence to some of the company. There
were sentences so involved and obscure that I was sure they would not be
understood, if indeed he understood them himself. But there are other
passages so entirely sane, and as it seems to me so just, that if any
reader attributes them to me I shall not think myself wronged by the
supposition. You must remember that Number Seven has had a fair
education, that he has been a wide reader in many directions, and that he
belongs to a family of remarkable intellectual gifts. So it was not
surprising that he said some things which pleased the company, as in fact
they did. The reader will not be startled to see a certain abruptness in
the transition from one subject to another,--it is a characteristic of
the squinting brain wherever you find it. Another curious mark rarely
wanting in the subjects of mental strabismus is an irregular and often
sprawling and deformed handwriting. Many and many a time I have said,
after glancing at the back of a letter, "This comes from an insane
asylum, or from an eccentric who might well be a candidate for such an
institution." Number Seven's manuscript, which showed marks of my
corrections here and there, furnished good examples of the chirography of
persons with ill-mated cerebral hemispheres. But the earlier portions of
the manuscript are of perfectly normal appearance.

Conticuere omnes, as Virgil says. We were all silent as Number Seven
began the reading of his paper.

          Number Seven reads.

I am the seventh son of a seventh son, as I suppose you all know. It is
commonly believed that some extraordinary gifts belong to the fortunate
individuals born under these exceptional conditions. However this may be,
a peculiar virtue was supposed to dwell in me from my earliest years. My
touch was believed to have the influence formerly attributed to that of
the kings and queens of England. You may remember that the great Dr.
Samuel Johnson, when a child, was carried to be touched by her Majesty
Queen Anne for the "king's evil," as scrofula used to be called. Our
honored friend The Dictator will tell you that the brother of one of his
Andover schoolmates was taken to one of these gifted persons, who touched
him, and hung a small bright silver coin, either a "fourpence ha'penny"
or a "ninepence," about his neck, which, strange to say, after being worn
a certain time, became tarnished, and finally black,--a proof of the
poisonous matters which had become eliminated from the system and
gathered upon the coin. I remember that at one time I used to carry
fourpence ha'pennies with holes bored through them, which I furnished to
children or to their mothers, under pledges of secrecy,--receiving a
piece of silver of larger dimensions in exchange. I never felt quite
sure about any extraordinary endowment being a part of my inheritance in
virtue of my special conditions of birth. A phrenologist, who examined
my head when I was a boy, said the two sides were unlike. My hatter's
measurement told me the same thing; but in looking over more than a
bushel of the small cardboard hat-patterns which give the exact shape of
the head, I have found this is not uncommon. The phrenologist made all
sorts of predictions of what I should be and do, which proved about as
near the truth as those recorded in Miss Edith Thomas's charming little
poem, "Augury," which some of us were reading the other day.

I have never been through college, but I had a relative who was famous as
a teacher of rhetoric in one of our universities, and especially for
taking the nonsense out of sophomorical young fellows who could not say
anything without rigging it up in showy and sounding phrases. I think I
learned from him to express myself in good old-fashioned English, and
without making as much fuss about it as our Fourth of July orators and
political haranguers were in the habit of making.

I read a good many stories during my boyhood, one of which left a lasting
impression upon me, and which I have always commended to young people.
It is too late, generally, to try to teach old people, yet one may profit
by it at any period of life before the sight has become too dim to be of
any use. The story I refer to is in "Evenings at Home," and is called
"Eyes and No Eyes." I ought to have it by me, but it is constantly
happening that the best old things get overlaid by the newest trash; and
though I have never seen anything of the kind half so good, my table and
shelves are cracking with the weight of involuntary accessions to my
library.

This is the story as I remember it: Two children walk out, and are
questioned when they come home. One has found nothing to observe,
nothing to admire, nothing to describe, nothing to ask questions about.
The other has found everywhere objects of curiosity and interest. I
advise you, if you are a child anywhere under forty-five, and do not yet
wear glasses, to send at once for "Evenings at Home" and read that story.
For myself, I am always grateful to the writer of it for calling my
attention to common things. How many people have been waked to a quicker
consciousness of life by Wordsworth's simple lines about the daffodils,
and what he says of the thoughts suggested to him by "the meanest flower
that blows"!

I was driving with a friend, the other day, through a somewhat dreary
stretch of country, where there seemed to be very little to attract
notice or deserve remark. Still, the old spirit infused by "Eyes and No
Eyes" was upon me, and I looked for something to fasten my thought upon,
and treat as an artist treats a study for a picture. The first object to
which my eyes were drawn was an old-fashioned well-sweep. It did not take
much imaginative sensibility to be stirred by the sight of this most
useful, most ancient, most picturesque, of domestic conveniences. I know
something of the shadoof of Egypt,--the same arrangement by which the
sacred waters of the Nile have been lifted, from the days of the Pharaohs
to those of the Khedives. That long forefinger pointing to heaven was a
symbol which spoke to the Puritan exile as it spoke of old to the
enslaved Israelite. Was there ever any such water as that which we used
to draw from the deep, cold well, in "the old oaken bucket"? What
memories gather about the well in all ages! What love-matches have been
made at its margin, from the times of Jacob and, Rachel downward! What
fairy legends hover over it, what fearful mysteries has it hidden! The
beautiful well-sweep! It is too rarely that we see it, and as it dies
out and gives place to the odiously convenient pump, with the last patent
on its cast-iron uninterestingness, does it not seem as if the farmyard
aspect had lost half its attraction? So long as the dairy farm exists,
doubtless there must be every facility for getting water in abundance;
but the loss of the well-sweep cannot be made up to us even if our milk
were diluted to twice its present attenuation.

The well-sweep had served its turn, and my companion and I relapsed into
silence. After a while we passed another farmyard, with nothing which
seemed deserving of remark except the wreck of an old wagon.

"Look," I said, "if you want to see one of the greatest of all the
triumphs of human ingenuity, one of the most beautiful, as it is one of
the most useful, of all the mechanisms which the intelligence of
successive ages has called into being."

"I see nothing," my companion answered, "but an old broken-down wagon.
Why they leave such a piece of lumbering trash about their place, where
people can see it as they pass, is more than I can account for."

"And yet," said I, "there is one of the most extraordinary products of
human genius and skill,--an object which combines the useful and the
beautiful to an extent which hardly any simple form of mechanism can
pretend to rival. Do you notice how, while everything else has gone to
smash, that wheel remains sound and fit for service? Look at it merely
for its beauty.

"See the perfect circles, the outer and the inner. A circle is in itself
a consummate wonder of geometrical symmetry. It is the line in which the
omnipotent energy delights to move. There is no fault in it to be
amended. The first drawn circle and the last both embody the same
complete fulfillment of a perfect design. Then look at the rays which
pass from the inner to the outer circle. How beautifully they bring the
greater and lesser circles into connection with each other! The flowers
know that secret,--the marguerite in the meadow displays it as clearly as
the great sun in heaven. How beautiful is this flower of wood and iron,
which we were ready to pass by without wasting a look upon it! But its
beauty is only the beginning of its wonderful claim upon us for our
admiration. Look at that field of flowering grass, the triticum
vulgare,--see how its waves follow the breeze in satiny alternations of
light and shadow. You admire it for its lovely aspect; but when you
remember that this flowering grass is wheat, the finest food of the
highest human races, it gains a dignity, a glory, that its beauty alone
could not give it.

"Now look at that exquisite structure lying neglected and disgraced, but
essentially unchanged in its perfection, before you. That slight and
delicate-looking fabric has stood such a trial as hardly any slender
contrivance, excepting always the valves of the heart, was ever subjected
to. It has rattled for years over the cobble-stones of a rough city
pavement. It has climbed over all the accidental obstructions it met in
the highway, and dropped into all the holes and deep ruts that made the
heavy farmer sitting over it use his Sunday vocabulary in a week-day form
of speech. At one time or another, almost every part of that old wagon
has given way. It has had two new pairs of shafts. Twice the axle has
broken off close to the hub, or nave. The seat broke when Zekle and
Huldy were having what they called 'a ride' together. The front was
kicked in by a vicious mare. The springs gave way and the floor bumped
on the axle. Every portion of the wagon became a prey of its special
accident, except that most fragile looking of all its parts, the wheel.
Who can help admiring the exact distribution of the power of resistance
at the least possible expenditure of material which is manifested in this
wondrous triumph of human genius and skill? The spokes are planted in
the solid hub as strongly as the jaw-teeth of a lion in their deep-sunken
sockets. Each spoke has its own territory in the circumference, for
which it is responsible. According to the load the vehicle is expected
to carry, they are few or many, stout or slender, but they share their
joint labor with absolute justice,--not one does more, not one does less,
than its just proportion. The outer end of the spokes is received into
the deep mortise of the wooden fellies, and the structure appears to be
complete. But how long would it take to turn that circle into a polygon,
unless some mighty counteracting force should prevent it? See the iron
tire brought hot from the furnace and laid around the smoking
circumference. Once in place, the workman cools the hot iron; and as it
shrinks with a force that seems like a hand-grasp of the Omnipotent, it
clasps the fitted fragments of the structure, and compresses them into a
single inseparable whole.

"Was it not worth our while to stop a moment before passing that old
broken wagon, and see whether we could not find as much in it as Swift
found in his 'Meditations on a Broomstick'? I have been laughed at for
making so much of such a common thing as a wheel. Idiots! Solomon's
court fool would have scoffed at the thought of the young Galilean who
dared compare the lilies of the field to his august master. Nil admirari
is very well for a North American Indian and his degenerate successor,
who has grown too grand to admire anything but himself, and takes a
cynical pride in his stolid indifference to everything worth reverencing
or honoring."

After calling my companion's attention to the wheel, and discoursing upon
it until I thought he was getting sleepy, we jogged along until we came
to a running stream. It was crossed by a stone bridge of a single arch.
There are very few stone arches over the streams in New England country
towns, and I always delighted in this one. It was built in the last
century, amidst the doubting predictions of staring rustics, and stands
to-day as strong as ever, and seemingly good for centuries to come.

"See there!" said I,--"there is another of my 'Eyes and No Eyes' subjects
to meditate upon. Next to the wheel, the arch is the noblest of those
elementary mechanical composites, corresponding to the proximate
principles of chemistry. The beauty of the arch consists first in its
curve, commonly a part of the circle, of the perfection of which I have
spoken. But the mind derives another distinct pleasure from the
admirable manner in which the several parts, each different from all the
others, contribute to a single harmonious effect. It is a typical
example of the piu nel uno. An arch cut out or a single stone would not
be so beautiful as one of which each individual stone was shaped for its
exact position. Its completion by the locking of the keystone is a
delight to witness and to contemplate. And how the arch endures, when
its lateral thrust is met by solid masses of resistance! In one of the
great temples of Baalbec a keystone has slipped, but how rare is that
occurrence! One will hardly find another such example among all the
ruins of antiquity. Yes, I never get tired of arches. They are noble
when shaped of solid marble blocks, each carefully beveled for its
position. They are beautiful when constructed with the large thin tiles
the Romans were so fond of using. I noticed some arches built in this
way in the wall of one of the grand houses just going up on the bank of
the river. They were over the capstones of the windows,--to take off the
pressure from them, no doubt, for now and then a capstone will crack
under the weight of the superincumbent mass. How close they fit, and how
striking the effect of their long radiations!"

The company listened very well up to this point. When he began the
strain of thoughts which follows, a curious look went round The Teacups.

What a strange underground life is that which is led by the organisms we
call trees! These great fluttering masses of leaves, stems, boughs,
trunks, are not the real trees. They live underground, and what we see
are nothing more nor less than their tails.

The Mistress dropped her teaspoon. Number Five looked at the Doctor,
whose face was very still and sober. The two Annexes giggled, or came
very near it.

Yes, a tree is an underground creature, with its tail in the air. All its
intelligence is in its roots. All the senses it has are in its roots.
Think what sagacity it shows in its search after food and drink! Somehow
or other, the rootlets, which are its tentacles, find out that there is a
brook at a moderate distance from the trunk of the tree, and they make
for it with all their might. They find every crack in the rocks where
there are a few grains of the nourishing substance they care for, and
insinuate themselves into its deepest recesses. When spring and summer
come, they let their tails grow, and delight in whisking them about in
the wind, or letting them be whisked about by it; for these tails are
poor passive things, with very little will of their own, and bend in
whatever direction the wind chooses to make them. The leaves make a deal
of noise whispering. I have sometimes thought I could understand them,
as they talk with each other, and that they seemed to think they made the
wind as they wagged forward and back. Remember what I say. The next
time you see a tree waving in the wind, recollect that it is the tail of
a great underground, many-armed, polypus-like creature, which is as proud
of its caudal appendage, especially in summer-time, as a peacock of his
gorgeous expanse of plumage.

Do you think there is anything so very odd about this idea? Once get it
well into your heads, and you will find it renders the landscape
wonderfully interesting. There are as many kinds of tree-tails as there
are of tails to dogs and other quadrupeds. Study them as Daddy Gilpin
studied them in his "Forest Scenery," but don't forget that they are only
the appendage of the underground vegetable polypus, the true organism to
which they belong.

He paused at this point, and we all drew long breaths, wondering what was
coming next. There was no denying it, the "cracked Teacup" was clinking
a little false,--so it seemed to the company. Yet, after all, the fancy
was not delirious,--the mind could follow it well enough; let him go on.

What do you say to this? You have heard all sorts of things said in
prose and verse about Niagara. Ask our young Doctor there what it
reminds him of. Is n't it a giant putting his tongue out? How can you
fail to see the resemblance? The continent is a great giant, and the
northern half holds the head and shoulders. You can count the pulse of
the giant wherever the tide runs up a creek; but if you want to look at
the giant's tongue, you must go to Niagara. If there were such a thing
as a cosmic physician, I believe he could tell the state of the country's
health, and the prospects of the mortality for the coming season, by
careful inspection of the great tongue, which Niagara is putting out for
him, and has been showing to mankind ever since the first flint-shapers
chipped their arrow-heads. You don't think the idea adds to the
sublimity and associations of the cataract? I am sorry for that, but I
can't help the suggestion. It is just as manifestly a tongue put out for
inspection as if it had Nature's own label to that effect hung over it.
I don't know whether you can see these things as clearly as I do. There
are some people that never see anything, if it is as plain as a hole in a
grindstone, until it is pointed out to them; and some that can't see it
then, and won't believe there is any hole till they've poked their finger
through it. I've got a great many things to thank God for, but perhaps
most of all that I can find something to admire, to wonder at, to set my
fancy going, and to wind up my enthusiasm pretty much everywhere.

Look here! There are crowds of people whirled through our streets on
these new-fashioned cars, with their witch-broomsticks overhead,--if they
don't come from Salem, they ought to,--and not more than one in a dozen
of these fish-eyed bipeds thinks or cares a nickel's worth about the
miracle which is wrought for their convenience. They know that without
hands or feet, without horses, without steam, so far as they can see,
they are transported from place to place, and that there is nothing to
account for it except the witch-broomstick and the iron or copper cobweb
which they see stretched above them. What do they know or care about
this last revelation of the omnipresent spirit of the material universe?
We ought to go down on our knees when one of these mighty caravans, car
after car, spins by us, under the mystic impulse which seems to know not
whether its train is loaded or empty. We are used to force in the
muscles of horses, in the expansive potency of steam, but here we have
force stripped stark naked,--nothing but a filament to cover its
nudity,--and yet showing its might in efforts that would task the
working-beam of a ponderous steam-engine. I am thankful that in an age
of cynicism I have not lost my reverence. Perhaps you would wonder to
see how some very common sights impress me. I always take off my hat if
I stop to speak to a stone-cutter at his work. "Why?" do you ask me?
Because I know that his is the only labor that is likely to endure. A
score of centuries has not effaced the marks of the Greek's or the
Roman's chisel on his block of marble. And now, before this new
manifestation of that form of cosmic vitality which we call electricity,
I feel like taking the posture of the peasants listening to the Angelus.
How near the mystic effluence of mechanical energy brings us to the
divine source of all power and motion! In the old mythology, the right
hand of Jove held and sent forth the lightning. So, in the record of the
Hebrew prophets, did the right hand of Jehovah cast forth and direct it.
Was Nahum thinking of our far-off time when he wrote, "The chariots shall
rage in the streets, they shall justle one against another in the broad
ways: they shall seem like torches, they shall run like the lightnings"?

Number Seven had finished reading his paper. Two bright spots in his
cheeks showed that he had felt a good deal in writing it, and the flush
returned as he listened to his own thoughts. Poor old fellow! The
"cracked Teacup" of our younger wits,--not yet come to their full human
sensibilities,--the "crank" of vulgar tongues, the eccentric, the seventh
son of a seventh son, too often made the butt of thoughtless pleasantry,
was, after all, a fellow-creature, with flesh and blood like the rest of
us. The wild freaks of his fancy did not hurt us, nor did they prevent
him from seeing many things justly, and perhaps sometimes more vividly
and acutely than if he were as sound as the dullest of us.

The teaspoons tinkled loudly all round the table, as he finished reading.
The Mistress caught her breath. I was afraid she was going to sob, but
she took it out in vigorous stirring of her tea. Will you believe that I
saw Number Five, with a sweet, approving smile on her face all the time,
brush her cheek with her hand-kerchief? There must have been a tear
stealing from beneath its eyelid. I hope Number Seven saw it. He is one
of the two men at our table who most need the tender looks and tones of a
woman. The Professor and I are hors de combat; the Counsellor is busy
with his cases and his ambitions; the Doctor is probably in love with a
microscope, and flirting with pathological specimens; but Number Seven
and the Tutor are, I fear, both suffering from that worst of all famines,
heart-hunger.

Do you remember that Number Seven said he never wrote a line of "poetry"
in his life, except once when he was suffering from temporary weakness of
body and mind? That is because he is a poet. If he had not been one, he
would very certainly have taken to tinkling rhymes. What should you
think of the probable musical genius of a young man who was particularly
fond of jingling a set of sleigh-bells? Should you expect him to turn
out a Mozart or a Beethoven? Now, I think I recognize the poetical
instinct in Number Seven, however imperfect may be its expression, and
however he may be run away with at times by fantastic notions that come
into his head. If fate had allotted him a helpful companion in the shape
of a loving and intelligent wife, he might have been half cured of his
eccentricities, and we should not have had to say, in speaking of him,
"Poor fellow!" But since this cannot be, I am pleased that he should
have been so kindly treated on the occasion of the reading of his paper.
If he saw Number Five's tear, he will certainly fall in love with her.
No matter if he does Number Five is a kind of Circe who does not turn the
victims of her enchantment into swine, but into lambs. I want to see
Number Seven one of her little flock. I say "little." I suspect it is
larger than most of us know. Anyhow, she can spare him sympathy and
kindness and encouragement enough to keep him contented with himself and
with her, and never miss the pulses of her loving life she lends him. It
seems to be the errand of some women to give many people as much
happiness as they have any right to in this world. If they concentrated
their affection on one, they would give him more than any mortal could
claim as his share. I saw Number Five watering her flowers, the other
day. The watering-pot had one of those perforated heads, through which
the water runs in many small streams. Every plant got its share: the
proudest lily bent beneath the gentle shower; the lowliest daisy held its
little face up for baptism. All were refreshed, none was flooded.
Presently she took the perforated head, or "rose," from the neck of the
watering-pot, and the full stream poured out in a round, solid column.
It was almost too much for the poor geranium on which it fell, and it
looked at one minute as if the roots would be laid bare, and perhaps the
whole plant be washed out of the soil in which it was planted. What if
Number Five should take off the "rose" that sprinkles her affections on
so many, and pour them all on one? Can that ever be? If it can, life is
worth living for him on whom her love may be lavished.

One of my neighbors, a thorough American, is much concerned about the
growth of what he calls the "hard-handed aristocracy." He tells the
following story:--

"I was putting up a fence about my yard, and employed a man of whom I
knew something,--that he was industrious, temperate, and that he had a
wife and children to support,--a worthy man, a native New Englander. I
engaged him, I say, to dig some post-holes. My employee bought a new
spade and scoop on purpose, and came to my place at the appointed time,
and began digging. While he was at work, two men came over from a
drinking-saloon, to which my residence is nearer than I could desire.
One of them I had known as Mike Fagan, the other as Hans Schleimer. They
looked at Hiram, my New Hampshire man, in a contemptuous and threatening
way for a minute or so, when Fagan addressed him:

"'And how much does the man pay yez by the hour?'

"'The gentleman does n't pay me by the hour,' said Hiram.

"'How mosh does he bay you by der veeks?' said Hans.

"'I don' know as that's any of your business,' answered Hiram.

"'Faith, we'll make it our business,' said Mike Fagan. 'We're Knoights
of Labor, we'd have yez to know, and ye can't make yer bargains jist as
ye loikes. We manes to know how mony hours ye worrks, and how much ye
gets for it.'

"'Knights of Labor!' said I. 'Why, that is a kind of title of nobility,
is n't it? I thought the laws of our country did n't allow titles of
that kind. But if you have a right to be called knights, I suppose I
ought to address you as such. Sir Michael, I congratulate you on the
dignity you have attained. I hope Lady Fagan is getting on well with my
shirts. Sir Hans, I pay my respects to your title. I trust that Lady
Schleixner has got through that little difficulty between her ladyship
and yourself in which the police court thought it necessary to
intervene.'

"The two men looked at me. I weigh about a hundred and eighty pounds,
and am well put together. Hiram was noted in his village as a
'rahstler.' But my face is rather pallid and peaked, and Hiram had
something of the greenhorn look. The two men, who had been drinking,
hardly knew what ground to take. They rather liked the sound of Sir
Michael and, Sir Hans. They did not know very well what to make of their
wives as 'ladies.' They looked doubtful whether to take what had been
said as a casus belli or not, but they wanted a pretext of some kind or
other. Presently one of them saw a label on the scoop, or longhandled,
spoon-like shovel, with which Hiram had been working.

"'Arrah, be jabers!' exclaimed Mike Fagan, 'but has n't he been a-tradin'
wid Brown, the hardware fellah, that we boycotted! Grab it, Hans, and
we'll carry it off and show it to the brotherhood.'

"The men made a move toward the implement.

"'You let that are scoop-shovel alone,' said Hiram.

"I stepped to his side. The Knights were combative, as their noble
predecessors with the same title always were, and it was necessary to
come to a voie de fait. My straight blow from the shoulder did for Sir
Michael. Hiram treated Sir Hans to what is technically known as a
cross-buttock.

"'Naow, Dutchman,' said Hiram, 'if you don't want to be planted in that
are post-hole, y'd better take y'rself out o' this here piece of private
property. "Dangerous passin," as the sign-posts say, abaout these
times.'

"Sir Michael went down half stunned by my expressive gesture; Sir Hans
did not know whether his hip was out of joint or he had got a bad sprain;
but they were both out of condition for further hostilities. Perhaps it
was hardly fair to take advantage of their misfortunes to inflict a
discourse upon them, but they had brought it on themselves, and we each
of us gave them a piece of our mind.

"'I tell you what it is,' said Hiram, 'I'm a free and independent
American citizen, and I an't a-gon' to hev no man tyrannize over me, if
he doos call himself by one o' them noblemen's titles. Ef I can't work
jes' as I choose, fur folks that wants me to work fur 'em and that I want
to work fur, I might jes' as well go to Sibery and done with it. My
gran'f'ther fit in Bunker Hill battle. I guess if our folks in them days
did n't care no great abaout Lord Percy and Sir William Haowe, we an't
a-gon' to be scart by Sir Michael Fagan and Sir Hans What 's-his-name,
nor no other fellahs that undertakes to be noblemen, and tells us common
folks what we shall dew an' what we sha'n't. No, sir!'

"I took the opportunity to explain to Sir Michael and Sir Hans what it
was our fathers fought for, and what is the meaning of liberty. If these
noblemen did not like the country, they could go elsewhere. If they did
n't like the laws, they had the ballot-box, and could choose new
legislators. But as long as the laws existed they must obey them. I
could not admit that, because they called themselves by the titles the
Old World nobility thought so much of, they had a right to interfere in
the agreements I entered into with my neighbor. I told Sir Michael that
if he would go home and help Lady Fagan to saw and split the wood for her
fire, he would be better employed than in meddling with my domestic
arrangements. I advised Sir Hans to ask Lady Schleimer for her bottle of
spirits to use as an embrocation for his lame hip. And so my two
visitors with the aristocratic titles staggered off, and left us plain,
untitled citizens, Hiram and myself, to set our posts, and consider the
question whether we lived in a free country or under the authority of a
self-constituted order of quasi-nobility."

It is a very curious fact that, with all our boasted "free and equal"
superiority over the communities of the Old World, our people have the
most enormous appetite for Old World titles of distinction. Sir Michael
and Sir Hans belong to one of the most extended of the aristocratic
orders. But we have also "Knights and Ladies of Honor," and, what is
still grander, "Royal Conclave of Knights and Ladies," "Royal Arcanum,"
and "Royal Society of Good Fellows," "Supreme Council," "Imperial
Court," "Grand Protector," and "Grand Dictator," and so on. Nothing
less than "Grand" and "Supreme" is good enough for the dignitaries of our
associations of citizens. Where does all this ambition for names without
realities come from? Because a Knight of the Garter wears a golden star,
why does the worthy cordwainer, who mends the shoes of his
fellow-citizens, want to wear a tin star, and take a name that had a
meaning as used by the representatives of ancient families, or the men
who had made themselves illustrious by their achievements?

It appears to be a peculiarly American weakness. The French republicans
of the earlier period thought the term citizen was good enough for
anybody. At a later period, "Roi Citoyen"--the citizen king was a common
title given to Louis Philippe. But nothing is too grand for the
American, in the way of titles. The proudest of them all signify
absolutely nothing. They do not stand for ability, for public service,
for social importance, for large possessions; but, on the contrary, are
oftenest found in connection with personalities to which they are
supremely inapplicable. We can hardly afford to quarrel with a national
habit which, if lightly handled, may involve us in serious domestic
difficulties. The "Right Worshipful" functionary whose equipage stops at
my back gate, and whose services are indispensable to the health and
comfort of my household, is a dignitary whom I must not offend. I must
speak with proper deference to the lady who is scrubbing my floors, when
I remember that her husband, who saws my wood, carries a string of
high-sounding titles which would satisfy a Spanish nobleman.

After all, every people must have its own forms of ostentation, pretence,
and vulgarity. The ancient Romans had theirs, the English and the French
have theirs as well,--why should not we Americans have ours? Educated
and refined persons must recognize frequent internal conflicts between
the "Homo sum" of Terence and the "Odi profanum vulgus" of Horace. The
nobler sentiment should be that of every true American, and it is in that
direction that our best civilization is constantly tending.

We were waited on by a new girl, the other evening. Our pretty maiden
had left us for a visit to some relative,--so the Mistress said. I do
sincerely hope she will soon come back, for we all like to see her
flitting round the table.

I don't know what to make of it. I had it all laid out in my mind. With
such a company there must be a love-story. Perhaps there will be, but
there may be new combinations of the elements which are to make it up,
and here is a bud among the full-blown flowers to which I must devote a
little space.

             Delilah.

I must call her by the name we gave her after she had trimmed the Samson
locks of our Professor. Delilah is a puzzle to most of us. A pretty
creature, dangerously pretty to be in a station not guarded by all the
protective arrangements which surround the maidens of a higher social
order. It takes a strong cage to keep in a tiger or a grizzly bear, but
what iron bars, what barbed wires, can keep out the smooth and subtle
enemy that finds out the cage where beauty is imprisoned? Our young
Doctor is evidently attracted by the charming maiden who serves him and
us so modestly and so gracefully. Fortunately, the Mistress never loses
sight of her. If she were her own daughter, she could not be more
watchful of all her movements. And yet I do not believe that Delilah
needs all this overlooking. If I am not mistaken, she knows how to take
care of herself, and could be trusted anywhere, in any company, without a
duenna. She has a history,--I feel sure of it. She has been trained and
taught as young persons of higher position in life are brought up, and
does not belong in the humble station in which we find her. But inasmuch
as the Mistress says nothing about her antecedents, we do not like to be
too inquisitive. The two Annexes are, it is plain, very curious about
her. I cannot wonder. They are both good-looking girls, but Delilah is
prettier than either of them. My sight is not so good as it was, but I
can see the way in which the eyes of the young people follow each other
about plainly enough to set me thinking as to what is going on in the
thinking marrow behind them. The young Doctor's follow Delilah as she
glides round the table,--they look into hers whenever they get a chance;
but the girl's never betray any consciousness of it, so far as I can see.
There is no mistaking the interest with which the two, Annexes watch all
this. Why shouldn't they, I should like to know? The Doctor is a bright
young fellow, and wants nothing but a bald spot and a wife to find
himself in a comfortable family practice. One of the Annexes, as I have
said, has had thoughts of becoming a doctress. I don't think the Doctor
would want his wife to practise medicine, for reasons which I will not
stop to mention. Such a partnership sometimes works wonderfully well, as
in one well-known instance where husband and wife are both eminent in the
profession; but our young Doctor has said to me that he had rather see
his wife,--if he ever should have one,--at the piano than at the
dissecting-table. Of course the Annexes know nothing about this, and
they may think, as he professed himself willing to lecture on medicine to
women, he might like to take one of his pupils as a helpmeet.

If it were not for our Delilah's humble position, I don't see why she
would not be a good match for any young man. But then it is so hard to
take a young woman from so very lowly a condition as that of a "waitress"
that it would require a deal of courage to venture on such a step. If we
could only find out that she is a princess in disguise, so to
speak,--that is, a young person of presentable connections as well as
pleasing looks and manners; that she has had an education of some kind,
as we suspected when she blushed on hearing herself spoken of as a
"gentille petite," why, then everything would be all right, the young
Doctor would have plain sailing,--that is, if he is in love with her, and
if she fancies him,--and I should find my love-story,--the one I
expected, but not between the parties I had thought would be mating with
each other.

Dear little Delilah! Lily of the valley, growing in the shade
now,--perhaps better there until her petals drop; and yet if she is all I
often fancy she is, how her youthful presence would illuminate and
sweeten a household! There is not one of us who does not feel interested
in her,--not one of us who would not be delighted at some Cinderella
transformation which would show her in the setting Nature meant for her
favorite.

The fancy of Number Seven about the witches' broomsticks suggested to one
of us the following poem:

        THE BROOMSTICK TRAIN;
     OR, THE RETURN OF THE WITCHES.

   Lookout! Look out, boys! Clear the track!
   The witches are here! They've all come back!
   They hanged them high,--No use! No use!
   What cares a witch for a hangman's noose?
   They buried them deep, but they would n't lie, still,
   For cats and witches are hard to kill;
   They swore they shouldn't and wouldn't die,
   Books said they did, but they lie! they lie!

   --A couple of hundred years, or so,
   They had knocked about in the world below,
   When an Essex Deacon dropped in to call,
   And a homesick feeling seized them all;
   For he came from a place they knew full well,
   And many a tale he had to tell.
   They long to visit the haunts of men,
   To see the old dwellings they knew again,
   And ride on their broomsticks all around
   Their wide domain of unhallowed ground.

   In Essex county there's many a roof
   Well known to him of the cloven hoof;
   The small square windows are full in view
   Which the midnight hags went sailing through,
   On their well-trained broomsticks mounted high,
   Seen like shadows against the sky;
   Crossing the track of owls and bats,
   Hugging before them their coal-black cats.

   Well did they know, those gray old wives,
   The sights we see in our daily drives
   Shimmer of lake and shine of sea,
   Brown's bare hill with its lonely tree,
   (It wasn't then as we see it now,
   With one scant scalp-lock to shade its brow;)
   Dusky nooks in the Essex woods,
   Dark, dim, Dante-like solitudes,
   Where the tree-toad watches the sinuous snake
   Glide through his forests of fern and brake;
   Ipswich River; its old stone bridge;
   Far off Andover's Indian Ridge,
   And many a scene where history tells
   Some shadow of bygone terror dwells,
   Of "Norman's Woe" with its tale of dread,
   Of the Screeching Woman of Marblehead,
   (The fearful story that turns men pale
   Don't bid me tell it,--my speech would fail.)

   Who would not, will not, if he can,
   Bathe in the breezes of fair Cape Ann,
   Rest in the bowers her bays enfold,
   Loved by the sachems and squaws of old?
   Home where the white magnolias bloom,
   Sweet with the bayberry's chaste perfume,
   Hugged by the woods and kissed by the seal
   Where is the Eden like to thee?

   For that "couple of hundred years, or so,"
   There had been no peace in the world below;
   The witches still grumbling, "It is n't fair;
   Come, give us a taste of the upper air!
   We've had enough of your sulphur springs,
   And the evil odor that round them clings;
   We long for a drink that is cool and nice,
   Great buckets of water with Wenham ice;
   We've served you well up-stairs, you know;
   You're a good old-fellow--come, let us go!"

   I don't feel sure of his being good,
   But he happened to be in a pleasant mood,
   As fiends with their skins full sometimes are,
   (He'd been drinking with "roughs" at a Boston bar.)
   So what does he do but up and shout
   To a graybeard turnkey, "Let 'em out!"

   To mind his orders was all he knew;
   The gates swung open, and out they flew.
   "Where are our broomsticks?" the beldams cried.
   "Here are your broomsticks," an imp replied.
   "They've been in--the place you know--so long
   They smell of brimstone uncommon strong;
   But they've gained by being left alone,
   Just look, and you'll see how tall they've grown."
   --And where is my cat? "a vixen squalled.
   Yes, where are our cats?" the witches bawled,
   And began to call them all by name:
   As fast as they called the cats, they came
   There was bob-tailed Tommy and long-tailed Tim,
   And wall-eyed Jacky and green-eyed Jim,
   And splay-foot Benny and slim-legged Beau,
   And Skinny and Squally, and Jerry and Joe,

   And many another that came at call,
   It would take too long to count them all.
   All black,--one could hardly tell which was which,
   But every cat knew his own old witch;
   And she knew hers as hers knew her,
   Ah, did n't they curl their tails and purr!

   No sooner the withered hags were free
   Than out they swarmed for a midnight spree;
   I could n't tell all they did in rhymes,
   But the Essex people had dreadful times.
   The Swampscott fishermen still relate
   How a strange sea-monster stole thair bait;
   How their nets were tangled in loops and knots,
   And they found dead crabs in their lobster-pots.
   Poor Danvers grieved for her blasted crops,
   And Wilmington mourned over mildewed hops.
   A blight played havoc with Beverly beans,
   It was all the work of those hateful queans!
   A dreadful panic began at "Pride's,"
   Where the witches stopped in their midnight rides,
   And there rose strange rumors and vague alarms
   'Mid the peaceful dwellers at Beverly Farms.

   Now when the Boss of the Beldams found
   That without his leave they were ramping round,
   He called,--they could hear him twenty miles,
   From Chelsea beach to the Misery Isles;
   The deafest old granny knew his tone
   Without the trick of the telephone.
   "Come here, you witches! Come here!" says he,
   --"At your games of old, without asking me
   I'll give you a little job to do
   That will keep you stirring, you godless crew!"

   They came, of course, at their master's call,
   The witches, the broomsticks, the cats, and all;
   He led the hags to a railway train
   The horses were trying to drag in vain.
   "Now, then," says he, "you've had your fun,
   And here are the cars you've got to run.

   "The driver may just unhitch his team,
   We don't want horses, we don't want steam;
   You may keep your old black cats to hug,
   But the loaded train you've got to lug."

   Since then on many a car you'll see
   A broomstick plain as plain can be;
   On every stick there's a witch astride,
   The string you see to her leg is tied.
   She will do a mischief if she can,
   But the string is held by a careful man,
   And whenever the evil-minded witch
   Would cut come caper, he gives a twitch.
   As for the hag, you can't see her,
   But hark! you can hear her black cat's purr,
   And now and then, as a car goes by,
   You may catch a gleam from her wicked eye.

   Often you've looked on a rushing train,
   But just what moved it was not so plain.
   It couldn't be those wires above,
   For they could neither pull nor shove;
   Where was the motor that made it go
   You couldn't guess, but now you know.

   Remember my rhymes when you ride again
   On the rattling rail by the broomstick train!




X

In my last report of our talks over the teacups I had something to say of
the fondness of our people for titles. Where did the anti-republican,
anti-democratic passion for swelling names come from, and how long has it
been naturalized among us?

A striking instance of it occurred at about the end of the last century.
It was at that time there appeared among us one of the most original and
singular personages to whom America has given birth. Many of our
company,--many of my readers,--all well acquainted with his name, and not
wholly ignorant of his history. They will not object to my giving some
particulars relating to him, which, if not new to them, will be new to
others into whose hands these pages may fall.

Timothy Dexter, the first claimant of a title of nobility among the
people of the United States of America, was born in the town of Malden,
near Boston. He served an apprenticeship as a leather-dresser, saved
some money, got some more with his wife, began trading and speculating,
and became at last rich, for those days. His most famous business
enterprise was that of sending an invoice of warming-pans to the West
Indies. A few tons of ice would have seemed to promise a better return;
but in point of fact, he tells us, the warming-pans were found useful in
the manufacture of sugar, and brought him in a handsome profit. His
ambition rose with his fortune. He purchased a large and stately house
in Newburyport, and proceeded to embellish and furnish it according to
the dictates of his taste and fancy. In the grounds about his house, he
caused to be erected between forty and fifty wooden statues of great men
and allegorical figures, together with four lions and one lamb. Among
these images were two statues of Dexter himself, one of which held a
label with a characteristic inscription. His house was ornamented with
minarets, adorned with golden balls, and surmounted by a large gilt
eagle. He equipped it with costly furniture, with paintings, and a
library. He went so far as to procure the services of a poet laureate,
whose business it seems to have been to sing his praises. Surrounded with
splendors like these, the plain title of "Mr." Dexter would have been
infinitely too mean and common. He therefore boldly took the step of
self-ennobling, and gave himself forth--as he said, obeying "the voice of
the people at large"--as "Lord Timothy Dexter," by which appellation he
has ever since been known to the American public.

If to be the pioneer in the introduction of Old World titles into
republican America can confer a claim to be remembered by posterity, Lord
Timothy Dexter has a right to historic immortality. If the true American
spirit shows itself most clearly in boundless self-assertion, Timothy
Dexter is the great original American egotist. If to throw off the
shackles of Old World pedantry, and defy the paltry rules and examples of
grammarians and rhetoricians, is the special province and the chartered
privilege of the American writer, Timothy Dexter is the founder of a new
school, which tramples under foot the conventionalities that hampered and
subjugated the faculties of the poets, the dramatists, the historians,
essayists, story-tellers, orators, of the worn-out races which have
preceded the great American people.

The material traces of the first American nobleman's existence have
nearly disappeared. The house is still standing, but the statues, the
minarets, the arches, and the memory of the great Lord Timothy Dexter
live chiefly in tradition, and in the work which he bequeathed to
posterity, and of which I shall say a few words. It is unquestionably a
thoroughly original production, and I fear that some readers may think I
am trifling with them when I am quoting it literally. I am going to make
a strong claim for Lord Timothy as against other candidates for a certain
elevated position.

Thomas Jefferson is commonly recognized as the first to proclaim before
the world the political independence of America. It is not so generally
agreed upon as to who was the first to announce the literary emancipation
of our country.

One of Mr. Emerson's biographers has claimed that his Phi Beta Kappa
Oration was our Declaration of Literary Independence. But Mr. Emerson
did not cut himself loose from all the traditions of Old World
scholarship. He spelled his words correctly, he constructed his
sentences grammatically. He adhered to the slavish rules of propriety,
and observed the reticences which a traditional delicacy has considered
inviolable in decent society, European and Oriental alike. When he wrote
poetry, he commonly selected subjects which seemed adapted to poetical
treatment,--apparently thinking that all things were not equally
calculated to inspire the true poet's genius. Once, indeed, he ventured
to refer to "the meal in the firkin, the milk in the pan," but he chiefly
restricted himself to subjects such as a fastidious conventionalism would
approve as having a certain fitness for poetical treatment. He was not
always so careful as he might have been in the rhythm and rhyme of his
verse, but in the main he recognized the old established laws which have
been accepted as regulating both. In short, with all his originality, he
worked in Old World harness, and cannot be considered as the creator of a
truly American, self-governed, self-centred, absolutely independent style
of thinking and writing, knowing no law but its own sovereign will and
pleasure.

A stronger claim might be urged for Mr. Whitman. He takes into his
hospitable vocabulary words which no English dictionary recognizes as
belonging to the language,--words which will be looked for in vain
outside of his own pages. He accepts as poetical subjects all things
alike, common and unclean, without discrimination, miscellaneous as the
contents of the great sheet which Peter saw let down from heaven. He
carries the principle of republicanism through the whole world of created
objects. He will "thread a thread through [his] poems," he tells us,
"that no one thing in the universe is inferior to another thing." No man
has ever asserted the surpassing dignity and importance of the American
citizen so boldly and freely as Mr. Whitman. He calls himself "teacher
of the unquenchable creed, namely, egotism." He begins one of his
chants, "I celebrate myself," but he takes us all in as partners in his
self-glorification. He believes in America as the new Eden.

"A world primal again,--vistas of glory incessant and branching, A new
race dominating previous ones and grander far, New politics--new
literature and religions--new inventions and arts."

Of the new literature be himself has furnished specimens which certainly
have all the originality he can claim for them. So far as egotism is
concerned, he was clearly anticipated by the titled personage to whom I
have referred, who says of himself, "I am the first in the East, the
first in the West, and the greatest philosopher in the Western world."
But while Mr. Whitman divests himself of a part of his baptismal name,
the distinguished New Englander thus announces his proud position: "Ime
the first Lord in the younited States of A mercary Now of Newburyport.
it is the voice of the peopel and I cant Help it." This extract is from
his famous little book called "A Pickle for the Knowing Ones." As an
inventor of a new American style he goes far beyond Mr. Whitman, who, to
be sure, cares little for the dictionary, and makes his own rules of
rhythm, so far as there is any rhythm in his sentences. But Lord Timothy
spells to suit himself, and in place of employing punctuation as it is
commonly used, prints a separate page of periods, colons, semicolons,
commas, notes of interrogation and of admiration, with which the reader
is requested to "peper and soolt" the book as he pleases.

I am afraid that Mr. Emerson and Mr. Whitman must yield the claim of
declaring American literary independence to Lord Timothy Dexter, who not
only taught his countrymen that they need not go to the Heralds' College
to authenticate their titles of nobility, but also that they were at
perfect liberty to spell just as they liked, and to write without
troubling themselves about stops of any kind. In writing what I suppose
he intended for poetry, he did not even take the pains to break up his
lines into lengths to make them look like verse, as may be seen by the
following specimen:

        WONDER OF WONDERS!

How great the soul is! Do not you all wonder and admire to see and
behold and hear? Can you all believe half the truth, and admire to hear
the wonders how great the soul is--only behold--past finding out! Only
see how large the soul is! that if a man is drowned in the sea what a
great bubble comes up out of the top of the water... The bubble is the
soul.

I confess that I am not in sympathy with some of the movements that
accompany the manifestations of American social and literary
independence. I do not like the assumption of titles of Lords and
Knights by plain citizens of a country which prides itself on recognizing
simple manhood and womanhood as sufficiently entitled to respect without
these unnecessary additions. I do not like any better the familiar, and
as it seems to me rude, way of speaking of our fellow-citizens who are
entitled to the common courtesies of civilized society. I never thought
it dignified or even proper for a President of the United States to call
himself, or to be called by others, "Frank" Pierce. In the first place I
had to look in a biographical dictionary to find out whether his
baptismal name was Franklin, or Francis, or simply Frank, for I think
children are sometimes christened with this abbreviated name. But it is
too much in the style of Cowper's unpleasant acquaintance:

     "The man who hails you Tom or Jack,
     And proves by thumping on your back
     How he esteems your merit."

I should not like to hear our past chief magistrates spoken of as Jack
Adams or Jim Madison, and it would have been only as a political partisan
that I should have reconciled myself to "Tom" Jefferson. So, in spite of
"Ben" Jonson, "Tom" Moore, and "Jack" Sheppard, I prefer to speak of a
fellow-citizen already venerable by his years, entitled to respect by
useful services to his country, and recognized by many as the prophet of
a new poetical dispensation, with the customary title of adults rather
than by the free and easy school-boy abbreviation with which he
introduced himself many years ago to the public. As for his rhapsodies,
Number Seven, our "cracked Teacup," says they sound to him like "fugues
played on a big organ which has been struck by lightning." So far as
concerns literary independence, if we understand by that term the getting
rid of our subjection to British criticism, such as it was in the days
when the question was asked, "Who reads an American book?" we may
consider it pretty well established. If it means dispensing with
punctuation, coining words at will, self-revelation unrestrained by a
sense of what is decorous, declamations in which everything is glorified
without being idealized, "poetry" in which the reader must make the
rhythms which the poet has not made for him, then I think we had better
continue literary colonists. I shrink from a lawless independence to
which all the virile energy and trampling audacity of Mr. Whitman fail to
reconcile me. But there is room for everybody and everything in our huge
hemisphere. Young America is like a three-year-old colt with his saddle
and bridle just taken off. The first thing he wants to do is to roll.
He is a droll object, sprawling in the grass with his four hoofs in the
air; but he likes it, and it won't harm us. So let him roll,--let him
roll.

Of all The Teacups around our table, Number Five is the one who is the
object of the greatest interest. Everybody wants to be her friend, and
she has room enough in her hospitable nature to find a place for every
one who is worthy of the privilege. The difficulty is that it is so hard
to be her friend without becoming her lover. I have said before that she
turns the subjects of her Circe-like enchantment, not into swine, but
into lambs. The Professor and I move round among her lambs, the docile
and amiable flock that come and go at her bidding, that follow her
footsteps, and are content to live in the sunshine of her smile and
within reach of the music of her voice. I like to get her away from
their amiable bleatings; I love to talk with her about life, of which she
has seen a great deal, for she knows what it is to be an idol in society
and the centre of her social circle. It might be a question whether
women or men most admire and love her. With her own sex she is always
helpful, sympathizing, tender, charitable, sharing their griefs as well
as taking part in their pleasures. With men it has seemed to make little
difference whether they were young or old: all have found her the same
sweet, generous, unaffected companion; fresh enough in feeling for the
youngest, deep enough in the wisdom of the heart for the oldest. She
does not pretend to be youthful, nor does she trouble herself that she
has seen the roses of more Junes than many of--the younger women who
gather round her. She has not had to say,

     Comme je regrette
     Mon bras si dodu,

for her arm has never lost its roundness, and her face is one of those
that cannot be cheated of their charm even if they live long enough to
look upon the grown up grandchildren of their coevals.

It is a wonder how Number Five can find the time to be so much to so many
friends of both sexes, in spite of the fact that she is one of the most
insatiable of readers. She not only reads, but she remembers; she not
only remembers, but she records, for her own use and pleasure, and for
the delight and profit of those who are privileged to look over her
note-books. Number Five, as I think I have said before, has not the
ambition to figure as an authoress. That she could write most agreeably
is certain. I have seen letters of hers to friends which prove that
clearly enough. Whether she would find prose or verse the most natural
mode of expression I cannot say, but I know she is passionately fond of
poetry, and I should not be surprised if, laid away among the pressed
pansies and roses of past summers, there were poems, songs, perhaps, of
her own, which she sings to herself with her fingers touching the piano;
for to that she tells her secrets in tones sweet as the ring-dove's call
to her mate.

I am afraid it may be suggested that I am drawing Number Five's portrait
too nearly after some model who is unconsciously sitting for it; but have
n't I told you that you must not look for flesh and blood personalities
behind or beneath my Teacups? I am not going to make these so lifelike
that you will be saying, This is Mr. or Miss, or Mrs. So-and-So. My
readers must remember that there are very many pretty, sweet, amiable
girls and women sitting at their pianos, and finding chords to the music
of their heart-strings. If I have pictured Number Five as one of her
lambs might do it, I have succeeded in what I wanted to accomplish. Why
don't I describe her person? If I do, some gossip or other will be sure
to say, "Oh, he means her, of course," and find a name to match the
pronoun.

It is strange to see how we are all coming to depend upon the friendly
aid of Number Five in our various perplexities. The Counsellor asked her
opinion in one of those cases where a divorce was too probable, but a
reconciliation was possible. It takes a woman to sound a woman's heart,
and she found there was still love enough under the ruffled waters to
warrant the hope of peace and tranquillity. The young Doctor went to her
for counsel in the case of a hysteric girl possessed with the idea that
she was a born poetess, and covering whole pages of foolscap with
senseless outbursts, which she wrote in paroxysms of wild excitement, and
read with a rapture of self-admiration which there was nothing in her
verses to justify or account for. How sweetly Number Five dealt with
that poor deluded sister in her talk with the Doctor! "Yes," she said to
him, "nothing can be fuller of vanity, self-worship, and self-deception.
But we must be very gentle with her. I knew a young girl tormented with
aspirations, and possessed by a belief that she was meant for a higher
place than that which fate had assigned her, who needed wholesome advice,
just as this poor young thing does. She did not ask for it, and it was
not offered. Alas, alas! 'no man cared for her soul,'--no man nor woman
either. She was in her early teens, and the thought of her earthly
future, as it stretched out before her, was more than she could bear, and
she sought the presence of her Maker to ask the meaning of her abortive
existence.--We will talk it over. I will help you take care of this
child."

The Doctor was thankful to have her assistance in a case with which he
would have found it difficult to deal if he had been left to, his unaided
judgment, and between them the young girl was safely piloted through the
perilous straits in which she came near shipwreck.

I know that it is commonly said of her that every male friend of hers
must become her lover unless he is already lassoed by another. Il fait
passer par l'a. The young Doctor is, I think, safe, for I am convinced
that he is bewitched with Delilah. Since she has left us, he has seemed
rather dejected; I feel sure that he misses her. We all do, but he more
seriously than the rest of us. I have said that I cannot tell whether
the Counsellor is to be counted as one of Number Five's lambs or not, but
he evidently admires her, and if he is not fascinated, looks as if he
were very near that condition.

It was a more delicate matter about which the Tutor talked with her.
Something which she had pleasantly said to him about the two Annexes led
him to ask her, more or less seriously, it may be remembered, about the
fitness of either of them to be the wife of a young man in his position.
She talked so sensibly, as it seemed to him, about it that he continued
the conversation, and, shy as he was, became quite easy and confidential
in her company. The Tutor is not only a poet, but is a great reader of
the poetry of many languages. It so happened that Number Five was
puzzled, one day, in reading a sonnet of Petrarch, and had recourse to
the Tutor to explain the difficult passage. She found him so thoroughly
instructed, so clear, so much interested, so ready to impart knowledge,
and so happy in his way of doing it, that she asked him if he would not
allow her the privilege of reading an Italian author under his guidance,
now and then.

The Tutor found Number Five an apt scholar, and something more than that;
for while, as a linguist, he was, of course, her master, her intelligent
comments brought out the beauties of an author in a way to make the text
seem like a different version. They did not always confine themselves to
the book they were reading. Number Five showed some curiosity about the
Tutor's relations with the two Annexes. She suggested whether it would
not be well to ask one or both of them in to take part in their readings.
The Tutor blushed and hesitated. "Perhaps you would like to ask one of
them," said Number Five. "Which one shall it be?" "It makes no
difference to me which," he answered, "but I do not see that we need
either." Number Five did not press the matter further. So the young
Tutor and Number Five read together pretty regularly, and came to depend
upon their meeting over a book as one of their stated seasons of
enjoyment. He is so many years younger than she is that I do not suppose
he will have to pass par la, as most of her male friends have done. I
tell her sometimes that she reminds me of my Alma Mater, always young,
always fresh in her attractions, with her scholars all round her, many of
them graduates, or to graduate sooner or later.

What do I mean by graduates? Why, that they have made love to her, and
would be entitled to her diploma, if she gave a parchment to each one of
them who had had the courage to face the inevitable. About the
Counsellor I am, as I have said, in doubt. Who wrote that "I Like You
and I Love You," which we found in the sugar-bowl the other day? Was it
a graduate who had felt the "icy dagger," or only a candidate for
graduation who was afraid of it? So completely does she subjugate those
who come under her influence that I believe she looks upon it as a matter
of course that the fateful question will certainly come, often after a
brief acquaintance. She confessed as much to me, who am in her
confidence, and not a candidate for graduation from her academy. Her
graduates--her lambs I called them--are commonly faithful to her, and
though now and then one may have gone off and sulked in solitude, most of
them feel kindly to her, and to those who have shared the common fate of
her suitors. I do really believe that some of them would be glad to see
her captured by any one, if such there can be, who is worthy of her. She
is the best of friends, they say, but can she love anybody, as so many
other women do, or seem to? Why shouldn't our Musician, who is evidently
fond of her company, and sings and plays duets with her, steal her heart
as Piozzi stole that of the pretty and bright Mrs. Thrale, as so many
music-teachers have run away with their pupils' hearts? At present she
seems to be getting along very placidly and contentedly with her young
friend the Tutor. There is something quite charming in their relations
with each other. He knows many things she does not, for he is reckoned
one of the most learned in his literary specialty of all the young men of
his time; and it can be a question of only a few years when some
first-class professorship will be offered him. She, on the other hand,
has so much more experience, so much more practical wisdom, than he has
that he consults her on many every-day questions, as he did, or made
believe do, about that of making love to one of the two Annexes. I had
thought, when we first sat round the tea-table, that she was good for the
bit of romance I wanted; but since she has undertaken to be a kind of
half-maternal friend to the young Tutor, I am afraid I shall have to give
her up as the heroine of a romantic episode. It would be a pity if there
were nothing to commend these papers to those who take up this periodical
but essays, more or less significant, on subjects more or less
interesting to the jaded and impatient readers of the numberless stories
and entertaining articles which crowd the magazines of this prolific
period. A whole year of a tea-table as large as ours without a single
love passage in it would be discreditable to the company. We must find
one, or make one, before the tea-things are taken away and the table is
no longer spread.

          The Dictator turns preacher.

We have so many light and playful talks over the teacups that some
readers may be surprised to find us taking up the most serious and solemn
subject which can occupy a human intelligence. The sudden appearance
among our New England Protestants of the doctrine of purgatory as a
possibility, or even probability, has startled the descendants of the
Puritans. It has naturally led to a reconsideration of the doctrine of
eternal punishment. It is on that subject that Number Five and I have
talked together. I love to listen to her, for she talks from the
promptings of a true woman's heart. I love to talk to her, for I learn
my own thoughts better in that way than in any other "L'appetit vient en
mangeant," the French saying has it. "L'esprit vient en causant;" that
is, if one can find the right persons to talk with.

The subject which has specially interested Number Five and myself, of
late, was suggested to me in the following way.

Some two years ago I received a letter from a clergyman who bears by
inheritance one of the most distinguished names which has done honor to
the American "Orthodox" pulpit. This letter requested of me "a
contribution to a proposed work which was to present in their own
language the views of 'many men of many minds' on the subject of future
punishment. It was in my mind to let the public hear not only from
professional theologians, but from other professions, as from jurists on
the alleged but disputed value of the hangman's whip overhanging the
witness-box, and from physicians on the working of beliefs about the
future life in the minds of the dangerously sick. And I could not help
thinking what a good thing it would be to draw out the present writer
upon his favorite borderland between the spiritual and the material."
The communication came to me, as the writer reminds me in a recent
letter, at a "painfully inopportune time," and though it was courteously
answered, was not made the subject of a special reply.

This request confers upon me a certain right to express my opinion on
this weighty subject without fear and without reproach even from those
who might be ready to take offence at one of the laity for meddling with
pulpit questions. It shows also that this is not a dead issue in our
community, as some of the younger generation seem to think. There are
some, there may be many, who would like to hear what impressions one has
received on the subject referred to, after a long life in which he has
heard and read a great deal about the matter. There is a certain gravity
in the position of one who is, in the order of nature very near the
undiscovered country. A man who has passed his eighth decade feels as if
he were already in the antechamber of the apartments which he may be
called to occupy in the house of many mansions. His convictions
regarding the future of our race are likely to be serious, and his
expressions not lightly uttered. The question my correspondent suggests
is a tremendous one. No other interest compares for one moment with that
belonging to it. It is not only ourselves that it concerns, but all whom
we love or ever have loved, all our human brotherhood, as well as our
whole idea of the Being who made us and the relation in which He stands
to his creatures. In attempting to answer my correspondent's question, I
shall no doubt repeat many things I have said before in different forms,
on different occasions. This is no more than every clergyman does
habitually, and it would be hard if I could not have the same license
which the professional preacher enjoys so fully.

Number Five and I have occasionally talked on religious questions, and
discovered many points of agreement in our views. Both of us grew up
under the old "Orthodox" or Calvinistic system of belief. Both of us
accepted it in our early years as a part of our education. Our experience
is a common one. William Cullen Bryant says of himself, "The Calvinistic
system of divinity I adopted of course, as I heard nothing else taught
from the pulpit, and supposed it to be the accepted belief of the
religious world." But it was not the "five points" which remained in the
young poet's memory and shaped his higher life. It was the influence of
his mother that left its permanent impression after the questions and
answers of the Assembly's Catechism had faded out, or remained in memory
only as fossil survivors of an extinct or fast-disappearing theological
formation. The important point for him, as for so many other children of
Puritan descent, was not his father's creed, but his mother's character,
precepts, and example. "She was a person," he says, "of excellent
practical sense, of a quick and sensitive moral judgment, and had no
patience with any form of deceit or duplicity. Her prompt condemnation of
injustice, even in those instances in which it is tolerated by the world,
made a strong impression upon me in early life; and if, in the discussion
of public questions, I have in my riper age endeavored to keep in view
the great rule of right without much regard to persons, it has been owing
in a great degree to the force of her example, which taught me never to
countenance a wrong because others did."

I have quoted this passage because it was an experience not wholly unlike
my own, and in certain respects like that of Number Five. To grow up in
a narrow creed and to grow out of it is a tremendous trial of one's
nature. There is always a bond of fellowship between those who have been
through such an ordeal.

The experiences we have had in common naturally lead us to talk over the
theological questions which at this time are constantly presenting
themselves to the public, not only in the books and papers expressly
devoted to that class of subjects, but in many of the newspapers and
popular periodicals, from the weeklies to the quarterlies. The pulpit
used to lay down the law to the pews; at the present time, it is of more
consequence what the pews think than what the minister does, for the
obvious reason that the pews can change their minister, and often do,
whereas the minister cannot change the pews, or can do so only to a very
limited extent. The preacher's garment is cut according to the pattern
of that of the hearers, for the most part. Thirty years ago, when I was
writing on theological subjects, I came in for a very pretty share of
abuse, such as it was the fashion of that day, at least in certain
quarters, to bestow upon those who were outside of the high-walled
enclosures in which many persons; not naturally unamiable or exclusive,
found themselves imprisoned. Since that time what changes have taken
place! Who will believe that a well-behaved and reputable citizen could
have been denounced as a "moral parricide," because he attacked some of
the doctrines in which he was supposed to have been brought up? A single
thought should have prevented the masked theologian who abused his
incognito from using such libellous language.

Much, and in many families most, of the religious teaching of children is
committed to the mother. The experience of William Cullen Bryant, which
I have related in his own words, is that of many New England children.
Now, the sternest dogmas that ever came from a soul cramped or palsied by
an obsolete creed become wonderfully softened in passing between the lips
of a mother. The cruel doctrine at which all but case-hardened
"professionals" shudder cones out, as she teaches and illustrates it, as
unlike its original as the milk which a peasant mother gives her babe is
unlike the coarse food which furnishes her nourishment. The virus of a
cursing creed is rendered comparatively harmless by the time it reaches
the young sinner in the nursery. Its effects fall as far short of what
might have been expected from its virulence as the pearly vaccine vesicle
falls short of the terrors of the confluent small-pox. Controversialists
should therefore be careful (for their own sakes, for they hurt nobody so
much as themselves) how they use such terms as "parricide" as
characterizing those who do not agree in all points with the fathers whom
or whose memory they honor and venerate. They might with as much
propriety call them matricides, if they did not agree with the milder
teachings of their mothers. I can imagine Jonathan Edwards in the
nursery with his three-year-old child upon his knee. The child looks up
to his face and says to him,--"Papa, nurse tells me that you say God
hates me worse than He hates one of those horrid ugly snakes that crawl
all round. Does God hate me so?"

"Alas! my child, it is but too true. So long as you are out of Christ
you are as a viper, and worse than a viper, in his sight."

By and by, Mrs. Edwards, one of the loveliest of women and sweetest of
mothers, comes into the nursery. The child is crying.

"What is the matter, my darling?"

"Papa has been telling me that God hates me worse than a snake."

Poor, gentle, poetical, sensitive, spiritual, almost celestial Mrs.
Jonathan Edwards! On the one hand the terrible sentence conceived,
written down, given to the press, by the child's father; on the other
side the trusting child looking up at her, and all the mother pleading in
her heart against the frightful dogma of her revered husband. Do you
suppose she left that poison to rankle in the tender soul of her darling?
Would it have been moral parricide for a son of the great divine to have
repudiated the doctrine which degraded his blameless infancy to the
condition and below the condition of the reptile? Was it parricide in
the second or third degree when his descendant struck out that venomous
sentence from the page in which it stood as a monument to what depth
Christian heathenism could sink under the teaching of the great master of
logic and spiritual inhumanity? It is too late to be angry about the
abuse a well--meaning writer received thirty years ago. The whole
atmosphere has changed since then. It is mere childishness to expect men
to believe as their fathers did; that is, if they have any minds of their
own. The world is a whole generation older and wiser than when the father
was of his son's age.

So far as I have observed persons nearing the end of life, the Roman
Catholics understand the business of dying better than Protestants. They
have an expert by them, armed with spiritual specifics, in which they
both, patient and priestly ministrant, place implicit trust. Confession,
the Eucharist, Extreme Unction,--these all inspire a confidence which
without this symbolism is too apt to be wanting in over-sensitive
natures. They have been peopled in earlier years with ghastly spectres
of avenging fiends, moving in a sleepless world of devouring flames and
smothering exhalations; where nothing lives but the sinner, the fiends,
and the reptiles who help to make life an unending torture. It is no
wonder that these images sometimes return to the enfeebled intelligence.
To exorcise them, the old Church of Christendom has her mystic formulae,
of which no rationalistic prescription can take the place. If Cowper had
been a good Roman Catholic, instead of having his conscience handled by a
Protestant like John Newton, he would not have died despairing, looking
upon himself as a castaway. I have seen a good many Roman Catholics on
their dying beds, and it always appeared to me that they accepted the
inevitable with a composure which showed that their belief, whether or
not the best to live by, was a better one to die by than most of the
harder creeds which have replaced it.

In the more intelligent circles of American society one may question
anything and everything, if he will only do it civilly. We may talk
about eschatology, the science of last things,--or, if you will, the
natural history of the undiscovered country, without offence before
anybody except young children and very old women of both sexes. In our
New England the great Andover discussion and the heretical missionary
question have benumbed all sensibility on this subject as entirely, as
completely, as the new local anaesthetic, cocaine, deadens the
sensibility of the part to which it is applied, so that the eye may have
its mote or beam plucked out without feeling it,--as the novels of Zola
and Maupassant have hardened the delicate nerve-centres of the women who
have fed their imaginations on the food they have furnished.

The generally professed belief of the Protestant world as embodied in
their published creeds is that the great mass of mankind are destined to
an eternity of suffering. That this eternity is to be one of bodily
pain--of "torment "--is the literal teaching of Scripture, which has been
literally interpreted by the theologians, the poets, and the artists of
many long ages which followed the acceptance of the recorded legends of
the church as infallible. The doctrine has always been recognized, as it
is now, as a very terrible one. It has found a support in the story of
the fall of man, and the view taken of the relation of man to his Maker
since that event. The hatred of God to mankind in virtue of their "first
disobedience" and inherited depravity is at the bottom of it. The extent
to which that idea was carried is well shown in the expressions I have
borrowed from Jonathan Edwards. According to his teaching,--and he was a
reasoner who knew what he was talking about, what was involved in the
premises of the faith he accepted,--man inherits the curse of God as his
principal birthright.

What shall we say to the doctrine of the fall of man as the ground of
inflicting endless misery on the human race? A man to be punished for
what he could not help! He was expected to be called to account for
Adam's sin. It is singular to notice that the reasoning of the wolf with
the lamb should be transferred to the dealings of the Creator with his
creatures. "You stirred the brook up and made my drinking-place muddy."
"But, please your wolfship, I couldn't do that, for I stirred the water
far down the stream,--below your drinking-place." "Well, anyhow, your
father troubled it a year or two ago, and that is the same thing." So
the wolf falls upon the lamb and makes a meal of him. That is wolf
logic,--and theological reasoning.

How shall we characterize the doctrine of endless torture as the destiny
of most of those who have lived, and are living, on this planet? I
prefer to let another writer speak of it. Mr. John Morley uses the
following words: "The horrors of what is perhaps the most frightful idea
that has ever corroded human character,--the idea of eternal punishment."
Sismondi, the great historian, heard a sermon on eternal punishment, and
vowed never again to enter another church holding the same creed.
Romanism he considered a religion of mercy and peace by the side of what
the English call the Reformation.--I mention these protests because I
happen to find them among my notes, but it would be easy to accumulate
examples of the same kind. When Cowper, at about the end of the last
century, said satirically of the minister he was attacking,

     "He never mentioned hell to ears polite,"

he was giving unconscious evidence that the sense of the barbarism of the
idea was finding its way into the pulpit. When Burns, in the midst of
the sulphurous orthodoxy of Scotland, dared to say,

     "The fear o' hell 's a hangman's whip
     To haud the wretch in order,"

he was only appealing to the common sense and common humanity of his
fellow-countrymen.

All the reasoning in the world, all the proof-texts in old manuscripts,
cannot reconcile this supposition of a world of sleepless and endless
torment with the declaration that "God is love."

Where did this "frightful idea" come from? We are surprised, as we grow
older, to find that the legendary hell of the church is nothing more nor
less than the Tartarus of the old heathen world. It has every mark of
coming from the cruel heart of a barbarous despot. Some malignant and
vindictive Sheik, some brutal Mezentius, must have sat for many pictures
of the Divinity. It was not enough to kill his captive enemy, after
torturing him as much as ingenuity could contrive to do it. He escaped
at last by death, but his conqueror could not give him up so easily, and
so his vengeance followed him into the unseen and unknown world. How the
doctrine got in among, the legends of the church we are no more bound to
show than we are to account for the intercalation of the "three
witnesses" text, or the false insertion, or false omission, whichever it
may be, of the last twelve verses of the Gospel of St Mark. We do not
hang our grandmothers now, as our ancestors did theirs, on the strength
of the positive command, "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live."

The simple truth is that civilization has outgrown witchcraft, and is
outgrowing the Christian Tartarus. The pulpit no longer troubles itself
about witches and their evil doings. All the legends in the world could
not arrest the decay of that superstition and all the edicts that grew
out of it. All the stories that can be found in old manuscripts will
never prevent the going out of the fires of the legendary Inferno. It is
not much talked about nowadays to ears polite or impolite. Humanity is
shocked and repelled by it. The heart of woman is in unconquerable
rebellion against it. The more humane sects tear it from their "Bodies
of Divinity" as if it were the flaming shirt of Nessus. A few doctrines
with which it was bound up have dropped or are dropping away from it: the
primal curse; consequential damages to give infinite extension to every
transgression of the law of God; inverting the natural order of relative
obligations; stretching the smallest of finite offenses to the
proportions of the infinite; making the babe in arms the responsible
being, and not the parent who gave it birth and determined its conditions
of existence.

After a doctrine like "the hangman's whip" has served its purpose,--if it
ever had any useful purpose,--after a doctrine like that of witchcraft
has hanged old women enough, civilization contrives to get rid of it.
When we say that civilization crowds out the old superstitious legends,
we recognize two chief causes. The first is the naked individual
protest; the voice of the inspiration which giveth man understanding.
This shows itself conspicuously in the modern poets. Burns in Scotland,
Bryant, Longfellow, Whittier, in America, preached a new gospel to the
successors of men like Thomas Boston and Jonathan Edwards. In due
season, the growth of knowledge, chiefly under the form of that part of
knowledge called science, so changes the views of the universe that many
of its long-unchallenged legends become no more than nursery tales. The
text-books of astronomy and geology work their way in between the
questions and answers of the time-honored catechisms. The doctrine of
evolution, so far as it is accepted, changes the whole relations of man
to the creative power. It substitutes infinite hope in the place of
infinite despair for the vast majority of mankind. Instead of a
shipwreck, from which a few cabin passengers and others are to be saved
in the long-boat, it gives mankind a vessel built to endure the tempests,
and at last to reach a port where at the worst the passengers can find
rest, and where they may hope for a home better than any which they ever
had in their old country. It is all very well to say that men and women
had their choice whether they would reach the safe harbor or not.

     "Go to it grandam, child;
     Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will
     Give it a plum, a cherry and a fig."

We know what the child will take. So which course we shall take depends
very much on the way the choice is presented to us, and on what the
chooser is by nature. What he is by nature is not determined by himself,
but by his parentage. "They know not what they do." In one sense this
is true of every human being. The agent does not know, never can know,
what makes him that which he is. What we most want to ask of our Maker
is an unfolding of the divine purpose in putting human beings into
conditions in which such numbers of them would be sure to go wrong. We
want an advocate of helpless humanity whose task it shall be, in the
words of Milton,

     "To justify the ways of God to man."

We have heard Milton's argument, but for the realization of his vision of
the time

     "When Hell itself shall pass away,
     And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day,"

our suffering race must wait in patience.

The greater part of the discourse the reader has had before him was
delivered over the teacups one Sunday afternoon. The Mistress looked
rather grave, as if doubtful whether she ought not to signify her
disapprobation of what seemed to her dangerous doctrine.

However, as she knew that I was a good church-goer and was on the best
terms with her minister, she said nothing to show that she had taken the
alarm. Number Five listened approvingly. We had talked the question
over well, and were perfectly agreed on the main point. How could it be
otherwise? Do you suppose that any intellectual, spiritual woman, with a
heart under her bodice, can for a moment seriously believe that the
greater number of the high-minded men, the noble and lovely women, the
ingenuous and affectionate children, whom she knows and honors or loves,
are to be handed over to the experts in a great torture-chamber, in
company with the vilest creatures that have once worn human shape?

"If there is such a world as used to be talked about from the pulpit, you
may depend upon it," she said to me once, "there will soon be organized a
Humane Society in heaven, and a mission established among 'the spirits in
prison.'"

Number Five is a regular church-goer, as I am. I do not believe either
of us would darken the doors of a church if we were likely to hear any of
the "old-fashioned" sermons, such as I used to listen to in former years
from a noted clergyman, whose specialty was the doctrine of eternal
punishment. But you may go to the churches of almost any of our
Protestant denominations, and hear sermons by which you can profit,
because the ministers are generally good men, whose moral and spiritual
natures are above the average, and who know that the harsh preaching of
two or three generations ago would offend and alienate a large part of
their audience. So neither Number Five nor I are hypocrites in attending
church or "going to meeting." I am afraid it does not make a great deal
of difference to either of us what may be the established creed of the
worshipping assembly. That is a matter of great interest, perhaps of
great importance, to them, but of much less, comparatively, to us.
Companionship in worship, and sitting quiet for an hour while a trained
speaker, presumably somewhat better than we are, stirs up our spiritual
nature,--these are reasons enough to Number Five, as to me, for regular
attendance on divine worship.

Number Seven is of a different way of thinking and feeling. He insists
upon it that the churches keep in their confessions of faith statements
which they do not believe, and that it is notorious that they are afraid
to meddle with them. The Anglo-American church has dropped the
Athanasian Creed from its service; the English mother church is afraid
to. There are plenty of Universalists, Number Seven says, in the
Episcopalian and other Protestant churches, but they do not avow their
belief in any frank and candid fashion. The churches know very well, he
maintains, that the fear of everlasting punishment more than any or all
other motives is the source of their power and the support of their
organizations. Not only are the fears of mankind the whip to scourge and
the bridle to restrain them, but they are the basis of an almost
incalculable material interest. "Talk about giving up the doctrine of
endless punishment by fire!" exclaimed Number Seven; "there is more
capital embarked in the subterranean fire-chambers than in all the
iron-furnaces on the face of the earth. To think what an army of
clerical beggars would be turned loose on the world, if once those raging
flames were allowed to go out or to calm down! Who can wonder that the
old conservatives draw back startled and almost frightened at the thought
that there may be a possible escape for some victims whom the Devil was
thought to have secured? How many more generations will pass before
Milton's alarming prophecy will find itself realized in the belief of
civilized mankind?"

Remember that Number Seven is called a "crank" by many persons, and take
his remarks for just what they are worth, and no more.

Out of the preceding conversation must have originated the following
poem, which was found in the common receptacle of these versified
contributions:

        TARTARUS.

   While in my simple gospel creed
   That "God is Love" so plain I read,
   Shall dreams of heathen birth affright
   My pathway through the coming night?
   Ah, Lord of life, though spectres pale
   Fill with their threats the shadowy vale,
   With Thee my faltering steps to aid,
   How can I dare to be afraid?

   Shall mouldering page or fading scroll
   Outface the charter of the soul?
   Shall priesthood's palsied arm protect
   The wrong our human hearts reject,
   And smite the lips whose shuddering cry
   Proclaims a cruel creed a lie?
   The wizard's rope we disallow
   Was justice once,--is murder now!

   Is there a world of blank despair,
   And dwells the Omnipresent there?
   Does He behold with smile serene
   The shows of that unending scene,
   Where sleepless, hopeless anguish lies,
   And, ever dying, never dies?

   Say, does He hear the sufferer's groan,
   And is that child of wrath his own?
   O mortal, wavering in thy trust,
   Lift thy pale forehead from the dust
   The mists that cloud thy darkened eyes
   Fade ere they reach the o'erarching skies!
   When the blind heralds of despair
   Would bid thee doubt a Father's care,
   Look up from earth, and read above
   On heaven's blue tablet, GOD IS LOVE!




XI

          The tea is sweetened.

We have been going on very pleasantly of late, each of us pretty well
occupied with his or her special business. The Counsellor has been
pleading in a great case, and several of The Teacups were in the
court-room. I thought, but I will not be certain, that some of his
arguments were addressed to Number Five rather than to the jury,--the
more eloquent passages especially.

Our young Doctor seems to me to be gradually getting known in the
neighborhood and beyond it. A member of one of the more influential
families, whose regular physician has gone to Europe, has sent for him to
come and see her, and as the patient is a nervous lady, who has nothing
in particular the matter with her, he is probably in for a good many
visits and a long bill by and by. He has even had a call at a distance
of some miles from home,--at least he has had to hire a conveyance
frequently of late, for he has not yet set up his own horse and chaise.
We do not like to ask him about who his patient may be, but he or she is
probably a person of some consequence, as he is absent several hours on
these out-of-town visits. He may get a good practice before his bald
spot makes its appearance, for I have looked for it many times without as
yet seeing a sign of it. I am sure he must feel encouraged, for he has
been very bright and cheerful of late; and if he sometimes looks at our
new handmaid as if he wished she were Delilah, I do not think he is
breaking his heart about her absence. Perhaps he finds consolation in
the company of the two Annexes, or one of them,--but which, I cannot make
out. He is in consultations occasionally with Number Five, too, but
whether professionally or not I have no means of knowing. I cannot for
the life of me see what Number Five wants of a doctor for herself, so
perhaps it is another difficult case in which her womanly sagacity is
called upon to help him.

In the mean time she and the Tutor continue their readings. In fact, it
seems as if these readings were growing more frequent, and lasted longer
than they did at first. There is a little arbor in the grounds connected
with our place of meeting, and sometimes they have gone there for their
readings. Some of The Teacups have listened outside once in a while, for
the Tutor reads well, and his clear voice must be heard in the more
emphatic passages, whether one is expressly listening or not. But
besides the reading there is now and then some talking, and persons
talking in an arbor do not always remember that latticework, no matter
how closely the vines cover it, is not impenetrable to the sound of the
human voice. There was a listener one day,--it was not one of The
Teacups, I am happy to say,--who heard and reported some fragments of a
conversation which reached his ear. Nothing but the profound intimacy
which exists between myself and the individual reader whose eyes are on
this page would induce me to reveal what I was told of this conversation.
The first words seem to have been in reply to some question.

"Why, my dear friend, how can you think of such a thing? Do you know--I
am--old enough to be your--[I think she must have been on the point of
saying mother, but that was more than any woman could be expected to
say]--old enough to be your aunt?"

"To be sure you are," answered the Tutor, "and what of it? I have two
aunts, both younger than I am. Your years may be more than mine, but
your life is fuller of youthful vitality than mine is. I never feel so
young as when I have been with you. I don't believe in settling
affinities by the almanac. You know what I have told you more than once;
you have n't 'bared the ice-cold dagger's edge' upon me yet; may I not
cherish the"....

What a pity that the listener did not hear the rest of the sentence and
the reply to it, if there was one! The readings went on the same as
before, but I thought that Number Five was rather more silent and more
pensive than she had been.

I was much pleased when the American Annex came to me one day and told me
that she and the English Annex were meditating an expedition, in which
they wanted the other Teacups to join. About a dozen miles from us is an
educational institution of the higher grade, where a large number of
young ladies are trained in literature, art, and science, very much as
their brothers are trained in the colleges. Our two young ladies have
already been through courses of this kind in different schools, and are
now busy with those more advanced studies which are ventured upon by only
a limited number of "graduates." They have heard a good deal about this
institution, but have never visited it.

Every year, as the successive classes finish their course, there is a
grand reunion of the former students, with an "exhibition," as it is
called, in which the graduates of the year have an opportunity of showing
their proficiency in the various branches taught. On that occasion
prizes are awarded for excellence in different departments. It would be
hard to find a more interesting ceremony. These girls, now recognized as
young ladies, are going forth as missionaries of civilization among our
busy people. They are many of them to be teachers, and those who have
seen what opportunities they have to learn will understand their fitness
for that exalted office. Many are to be the wives and mothers of the
generation next coming upon the stage. Young and beautiful, "youth is
always beautiful," said old Samuel Rogers,--their countenances radiant
with developed intelligence, their complexions, their figures, their
movements, all showing that they have had plenty of outdoor as well as
indoor exercise, and have lived well in all respects, one would like to
read on the wall of the hall where they are assembled,--

     Siste, viator!
     Si uxorem requiris, circumspice!

This proposed expedition was a great event in our comparatively quiet
circle. The Mistress, who was interested in the school, undertook to be
the matron of the party. The young Doctor, who knew the roads better
than any of us, was to be our pilot. He arranged it so that he should
have the two Annexes under his more immediate charge. We were all on the
lookout to see which of the two was to be the favored one, for it was
pretty well settled among The Teacups that a wife he must have, whether
the bald spot came or not; he was getting into business, and he could not
achieve a complete success as a bachelor.

Number Five and the Tutor seemed to come together as a matter of course.
I confess that I could not help regretting that our pretty Delilah was
not to be one of the party. She always looked so young, so fresh,--she
would have enjoyed the excursion so much, that if she had been still with
us I would have told the Mistress that she must put on her best dress;
and if she had n't one nice enough, I would give her one myself. I
thought, too, that our young Doctor would have liked to have her with us;
but he appeared to be getting along very well with the Annexes, one of
whom it seems likely that he will annex to himself and his fortunes, if
she fancies him, which is not improbable.

The organizing of this expedition was naturally a cause of great
excitement among The Teacups. The party had to be arranged in such a way
as to suit all concerned, which was a delicate matter. It was finally
managed in this way: The Mistress was to go with a bodyguard, consisting
of myself, the Professor, and Number Seven, who was good company, with
all his oddities. The young Doctor was to take the two Annexes in a
wagon, and the Tutor was to drive Number Five in a good old-fashioned
chaise drawn by a well-conducted family horse. As for the Musician, he
had gone over early, by special invitation, to take a part in certain
musical exercises which were to have a place in the exhibition. This
arrangement appeared to be in every respect satisfactory. The Doctor was
in high spirits, apparently delighted, and devoting himself with great
gallantry to his two fair companions. The only question which intruded
itself was, whether he might not have preferred the company of one to
that of two. But both looked very attractive in their best dresses: the
English Annex, the rosier and heartier of the two; the American girl,
more delicate in features, more mobile and excitable, but suggesting the
thought that she would tire out before the other. Which of these did he
most favor? It was hard to say. He seemed to look most at the English
girl, and yet he talked more with the American girl. In short, he
behaved particularly well, and neither of the young ladies could complain
that she was not attended to. As to the Tutor and Number Five, their
going together caused no special comment. Their intimacy was accepted as
an established fact, and nothing but the difference in their ages
prevented the conclusion that it was love, and not mere friendship, which
brought them together. There was, no doubt, a strong feeling among many
people that Number Five's affections were a kind of Gibraltar or
Ehrenbreitstein, say rather a high table-land in the region of perpetual,
unmelting snow. It was hard for these people to believe that any man of
mortal mould could find a foothold in that impregnable fortress,--could
climb to that height and find the flower of love among its glaciers. The
Tutor and Number Five were both quiet, thoughtful: he, evidently
captivated; she, what was the meaning of her manner to him? Say that she
seemed fond of him, as she might be were he her nephew,--one for whom she
had a special liking. If she had a warmer feeling than this, she could
hardly know how to manage it; for she was so used to having love made to
her without returning it that she would naturally be awkward in dealing
with the new experience.

The Doctor drove a lively five-year-old horse, and took the lead. The
Tutor followed with a quiet, steady-going nag; if he had driven the
five-year-old, I would not have answered for the necks of the pair in the
chaise, for he was too much taken up with the subject they were talking
of, to be very careful about his driving. The Mistress and her escort
brought up the rear,--I holding the reins, the Professor at my side, and
Number Seven sitting with the Mistress.

We arrived at the institution a little later than we had expected to, and
the students were flocking into the hall, where the Commencement
exercises were to take place, and the medal-scholars were to receive the
tokens of their excellence in the various departments. From our seats we
could see the greater part of the assembly,--not quite all, however of
the pupils. A pleasing sight it was to look upon, this array of young
ladies dressed in white, with their class badges, and with the ribbon of
the shade of blue affected by the scholars of the institution. If
Solomon in all his glory was not to be compared to a lily, a whole bed of
lilies could not be compared to this garden-bed of youthful womanhood.

The performances were very much the same as most of us have seen at the
academies and collegiate schools. Some of the graduating class read
their "compositions," one of which was a poem,--an echo of the prevailing
American echoes, of course, but prettily worded and intelligently read.
Then there was a song sung by a choir of the pupils, led by their
instructor, who was assisted by the Musician whom we count among The
Teacups.--There was something in one of the voices that reminded me of
one I had heard before. Where could it have been? I am sure I cannot
remember. There are some good voices in our village choir, but none so
pure and bird-like as this. A sudden thought came into my head, but I
kept it to myself. I heard a tremulous catching of the breath, something
like a sob, close by me. It was the Mistress,--she was crying. What was
she crying for? It was impressive, certainly, to listen to these young
voices, many of them blending for the last time,--for the scholars were
soon to be scattered all over the country, and some of them beyond its
boundaries,--but why the Mistress was so carried away, I did not know.
She must be more impressible than most of us; yet I thought Number Five
also looked as if she were having a struggle with herself to keep down
some rebellious signs of emotion.

The exercises went on very pleasingly until they came to the awarding of
the gold medal of the year and the valedictory, which was to be delivered
by the young lady to whom it was to be presented. The name was called;
it was one not unfamiliar to our ears, and the bearer of it--the Delilah
of our tea-table, Avis as she was known in the school and elsewhere--rose
in her place and came forward, so that for the first time on that day, we
looked upon her. It was a sensation for The Teacups. Our modest, quiet
waiting-girl was the best scholar of her year. We had talked French
before her, and we learned that she was the best French scholar the
teacher had ever had in the school. We had never thought of her except as
a pleasing and well-trained handmaiden, and here she was an accomplished
young lady.

Avis went through her part very naturally and gracefully, and when it was
finished, and she stood before us with the medal glittering on her
breast, we did not know whether to smile or to cry,--some of us did one,
and some the other.--We all had an opportunity to see her and
congratulate her before we left the institution. The mystery of her six
weeks' serving at our table was easily solved. She had been studying too
hard and too long, and required some change of scene and occupation. She
had a fancy for trying to see if she could support herself as so many
young women are obliged to, and found a place with us, the Mistress only
knowing her secret.

"She is to be our young Doctor's wife!" the Mistress whispered to me, and
did some more crying, not for grief, certainly.

Whether our young Doctor's long visits to a neighboring town had anything
to do with the fact that Avis was at that institution, whether she was
the patient he visited or not, may be left in doubt. At all events, he
had always driven off in the direction which would carry him to the place
where she was at school.

I have attended a large number of celebrations, commencements, banquets,
soirees, and so forth, and done my best to help on a good many of them.
In fact, I have become rather too well known in connection with
"occasions," and it has cost me no little trouble. I believe there is no
kind of occurrence for which I have not been requested to contribute
something in prose or verse. It is sometimes very hard to say no to the
requests. If one is in the right mood when he or she writes an
occasional poem, it seems as if nothing could have been easier. "Why,
that piece run off jest like ile. I don't bullieve," the unlettered
applicant says to himself, "I don't bullieve it took him ten minutes to
write them verses." The good people have no suspicion of how much a
single line, a single expression, may cost its author. The wits used to
say that Ropers,--the poet once before referred to, old Samuel Ropers,
author of the Pleasures of Memory and giver of famous breakfasts,--was
accustomed to have straw laid before the house whenever he had just given
birth to a couplet. It is not quite so bad as that with most of us who
are called upon to furnish a poem, a song, a hymn, an ode for some grand
meeting, but it is safe to say that many a trifling performance has had
more good honest work put into it than the minister's sermon of that week
had cost him. If a vessel glides off the ways smoothly and easily at her
launching, it does not mean that no great pains have been taken to secure
the result. Because a poem is an "occasional" one, it does not follow
that it has not taken as much time and skill as if it had been written
without immediate, accidental, temporary motive. Pindar's great odes
were occasional poems, just as much as our Commencement and Phi Beta
Kappa poems are, and yet they have come down among the most precious
bequests of antiquity to modern times.

The mystery of the young Doctor's long visits to the neighboring town was
satisfactorily explained by what we saw and heard of his relations with
our charming "Delilah,"--for Delilah we could hardly help calling her.
Our little handmaid, the Cinderella of the teacups, now the princess, or,
what was better, the pride of the school to which she had belonged, fit
for any position to which she might be called, was to be the wife of our
young Doctor. It would not have been the right thing to proclaim the
fact while she was a pupil, but now that she had finished her course of
instruction there was no need of making a secret of the engagement.

So we have got our romance, our love-story out of our Teacups, as I hoped
and expected that we should, but not exactly in the quarter where it
might have been looked for.

What did our two Annexes say to this unexpected turn of events? They
were good-hearted girls as ever lived, but they were human, like the rest
of us, and women, like some of the rest of us. They behaved perfectly.
They congratulated the Doctor, and hoped he would bring the young lady to
the tea-table where she had played her part so becomingly. It is safe to
say that each of the Annexes world have liked to be asked the lover's
last question by the very nice young man who had been a pleasant
companion at the table and elsewhere to each of them. That same question
is the highest compliment a man can pay a woman, and a woman does not
mind having a dozen or more such compliments to string on the rosary of
her remembrances. Whether either of them was glad, on the whole, that he
had not offered himself to the other in preference to herself would be a
mean, shabby question, and I think altogether too well of you who are
reading this paper to suppose that you would entertain the idea of asking
it.

It was a very pleasant occasion when the Doctor brought Avis over to sit
with us at the table where she used to stand and wait upon us. We
wondered how we could for a moment have questioned that she was one to be
waited upon, and not made for the humble office which nevertheless she
performed so cheerfully and so well.

   Commencements and other Celebrations, American and English.

The social habits of our people have undergone an immense change within
the past half century, largely in consequence of the vast development of
the means of intercourse between different neighborhoods.

Commencements, college gatherings of all kinds, church assemblages,
school anniversaries, town centennials,--all possible occasions for
getting crowds together are made the most of. "'T is sixty years
since,"--and a good many years over,--the time to which my memory
extends. The great days of the year were, Election,--General Election on
Wednesday, and Artillery Election on the Monday following, at which time
lilacs were in bloom and 'lection buns were in order; Fourth of July,
when strawberries were just going out; and Commencement, a grand time of
feasting, fiddling, dancing, jollity, not to mention drunkenness and
fighting, on the classic green of Cambridge. This was the season of
melons and peaches. That is the way our boyhood chronicles events. It
was odd that the literary festival should be turned into a Donnybrook
fair, but so it was when I was a boy, and the tents and the shows and the
crowds on the Common were to the promiscuous many the essential parts of
the great occasion. They had been so for generations, and it was only
gradually that the Cambridge Saturnalia were replaced by the decencies
and solemnities of the present sober anniversary.

Nowadays our celebrations smack of the Sunday-school more than of the
dancing-hall. The aroma of the punch-bowl has given way to the milder
flavor of lemonade and the cooling virtues of ice-cream. A strawberry
festival is about as far as the dissipation of our social gatherings
ventures. There was much that was objectionable in those swearing,
drinking, fighting times, but they had a certain excitement for us boys
of the years when the century was in its teens, which comes back to us
not without its fascinations. The days of total abstinence are a great
improvement over those of unlicensed license, but there was a picturesque
element about the rowdyism of our old Commencement days, which had a
charm for the eye of boyhood. My dear old friend,--book-friend, I
mean,--whom I always called Daddy Gilpin (as I find Fitzgerald called
Wordsworth, Daddy Wordsworth),--my old friend Gilpin, I say, considered
the donkey more picturesque in a landscape than the horse. So a village
fete as depicted by Teniers is more picturesque than a teetotal picnic or
a Sabbath-school strawberry festival. Let us be thankful that the
vicious picturesque is only a remembrance, and the virtuous commonplace a
reality of to-day.

What put all this into my head is something which the English Annex has
been showing me. Most of my readers are somewhat acquainted with our own
church and village celebrations. They know how they are organized; the
women always being the chief motors, and the machinery very much the same
in one case as in another. Perhaps they would like to hear how such
things are managed in England; and that is just what they may learn from
the pamphlet which was shown me by the English Annex, and of which I will
give them a brief account.

Some of us remember the Rev. Mr. Haweis, his lectures and his violin,
which interested and amused us here in Boston a few years ago. Now Mr.
Haweis, assisted by his intelligent and spirited wife, has charge of the
parish of St. James, Westmoreland Street, Marylebone, London. On entering
upon the twenty-fifth year of his incumbency in Marylebone, and the
twenty-eighth of his ministry in the diocese of London, it was thought a
good idea to have an "Evening Conversazione and Fete." We can imagine
just how such a meeting would be organized in one of our towns.
Ministers, deacons, perhaps a member of Congress, possibly a Senator, and
even, conceivably, his Excellency the Governor, and a long list of ladies
lend their names to give lustre to the occasion. It is all very
pleasant, unpretending, unceremonious, cheerful, well ordered,
commendable, but not imposing.

Now look at our Marylebone parish celebration, and hold your breath while
the procession of great names passes before you. You learn at the outset
that it is held UNDER ROYAL PATRONAGE, and read the names of two royal
highnesses, one highness, a prince, and a princess. Then comes a list
before which if you do not turn pale, you must certainly be in the habit
of rouging: three earls, seven lords, three bishops, two generals (one of
them Lord Wolseley), one admiral, four baronets, nine knights, a crowd of
right honorable and honorable ladies (many of them peeresses), and a mob
of other personages, among whom I find Mr. Howells, Bret Harte, and
myself.

Perhaps we are disposed to smile at seeing so much made of titles; but
after what we have learned of Lord Timothy Dexter and the high-sounding
names appropriated by many of our own compatriots, who have no more claim
to them than we plain Misters and Misseses, we may feel to them something
as our late friend Mr. Appleton felt to the real green turtle soup set
before him, when he said that it was almost as good as mock.

The entertainment on this occasion was of the most varied character. The
programme makes the following announcement:

        Friday, 4 July, 18-.

     At 8 P. M. the Doors will Open.
     Mr. Haweis will receive his Friends.
     The Royal Handbell Ringers will Ring.
     The Fish-pond will be Fished.
     The Stalls will be Visited.
     The Phonograph will Utter.

Refreshments will be called for, and they will come,--Tea, Coffee, and
Cooling Drinks. Spirits will not be called for, from the Vasty Deep or
anywhere else,--nor would they come if they were.

At 9.30 Mrs. Haweis will join the assembly.

I am particularly delighted with this last feature in the preliminary
announcement. It is a proof of the high regard in which the estimable
and gifted lady who shares her husband's labors is held by the people of
their congregation, and the friends who share in their feelings. It is
such a master stroke of policy, too, to keep back the principal
attraction until the guests must have grown eager for her appearance: I
can well imagine how great a saving it must have been to the good lady's
nerves, which were probably pretty well tried already by the fatigues and
responsibilities of the busy evening. I have a right to say this, for I
myself had the honor of attending a meeting at Mr. Haweis's house, where
I was a principal guest, as I suppose, from the fact of the great number
of persons who were presented to me. The minister must be very popular,
for the meeting was a regular jam,--not quite so tremendous as that
greater one, where but for the aid of Mr. Smalley, who kept open a
breathing-space round us, my companion and myself thought we should have
been asphyxiated.

The company was interested, as some of my readers maybe, to know what
were the attractions offered to the visitors besides that of meeting the
courteous entertainers and their distinguished guests. I cannot give
these at length, for each part of the show is introduced in the programme
with apt quotations and pleasantries, which enlivened the catalogue.
There were eleven stalls, "conducted on the cooperative principle of
division of profits and interest; they retain the profits, and you take a
good deal of interest, we hope, in their success."

Stall No. 1. Edisoniana, or the Phonograph. Alluded to by the Roman
Poet as Vox, et praeterea nihil.

Stall No. 2. Money-changing.

Stall No. 3. Programmes and General Enquiries.

Stall No. 4. Roses.

A rose by any other name, etc. Get one. You can't expect to smell one
without buying it, but you may buy one without smelling it.

Stall No. 5. Lasenby Liberty Stall. (I cannot explain this. Probably
articles from Liberty's famous establishment.)

Stall No. 6. Historical Costumes and Ceramics.

Stall No. 7. The Fish-pond.

Stall No. 8. Varieties.

Stall No. 9. Bookstall. (Books) "highly recommended for insomnia;
friends we never speak to, and always cut if we want to know them well."

Stall No. 10. Icelandic.

Stall No. 11. Call Office. "Mrs. Magnusson, who is devoted to the North
Pole and all its works, will thaw your sympathies, enlighten your minds,"
etc., etc.

All you buy may be left at the stalls, ticketed. A duplicate ticket will
be handed to you on leaving. Present your duplicate at the Call Office.

At 9.45, First Concert.

At 10.45, An Address of Welcome by Rev. H. R. Haweis.

At 11 P. M., Bird-warbling Interlude by Miss Mabel Stephenson, U. S. A.

At 11.20, Second Concert.

     NOTICE!

Three Great Pictures.

LORD TENNYSON.  G. F. Watts, R. A. JOHN STUART MILL G. F. Watts, R. A.
JOSEPH GARIBALDI Sig. Rondi.

     NOTICE!

A Famous Violin.

A world-famed Stradivarius Violin, for which Mr. Hill, of Bond Street,
gave L 1000, etc., etc.

     REFRESHMENTS.

Tickets for Tea, Coffee, Sandwiches, Iced Drinks, or Ices, Sixpence each,
etc., etc.

I hope my American reader is pleased and interested by this glimpse of
the way in which they do these things in London.

There is something very pleasant about all this, but what specially
strikes me is a curious flavor of city provincialism. There are little
centres in the heart of great cities, just as there are small fresh-water
ponds in great islands with the salt sea roaring all round them, and bays
and creeks penetrating them as briny as the ocean itself. Irving has
given a charming picture of such a quasi-provincial centre in one of his
papers in the Sketch-Book,--the one with the title "Little Britain."
London is a nation of itself, and contains provinces, districts, foreign
communities, villages, parishes,--innumerable lesser centres, with their
own distinguishing characteristics, habits, pursuit, languages, social
laws, as much isolated from each other as if "mountains interposed" made
the separation between them. One of these lesser centres is that over
which my friend Mr. Haweis presides as spiritual director. Chelsea has
been made famous as the home of many authors and artists,--above all, as
the residence of Carlyle during the greater part of his life. Its
population, like that of most respectable suburbs, must belong mainly to
the kind of citizens which resembles in many ways the better class,--as
we sometimes dare to call it,--of one of our thriving New England towns.
How many John Gilpins there must be in this population,--citizens of
"famous London town," but living with the simplicity of the inhabitants
of our inland villages! In the mighty metropolis where the wealth of the
world displays itself they practise their snug economies, enjoy their
simple pleasures, and look upon ice-cream as a luxury, just as if they
were living on the banks of the Connecticut or the Housatonic, in regions
where the summer locusts of the great cities have not yet settled on the
verdure of the native inhabitants. It is delightful to realize the fact
that while the West End of London is flaunting its splendors and the East
End in struggling with its miseries, these great middle-class communities
are living as comfortable, unpretending lives as if they were in one of
our thriving townships in the huckleberry-districts. Human beings are
wonderfully alike when they are placed in similar conditions.

We were sitting together in a very quiet way over our teacups. The young
Doctor, who was in the best of spirits, had been laughing and chatting
with the two Annexes. The Tutor, who always sits next to Number Five of
late, had been conversing with her in rather low tones. The rest of us
had been soberly sipping our tea, and when the Doctor and the Annexes
stopped talking there was one of those dead silences which are sometimes
so hard to break in upon, and so awkward while they last. All at once
Number Seven exploded in a loud laugh, which startled everybody at the
table.

What is it that sets you laughing so? said I.

"I was thinking," Number Seven replied, "of what you said the other day
of poetry being only the ashes of emotion. I believe that some people
are disposed to dispute the proposition. I have been putting your
doctrine to the test. In doing it I made some rhymes,--the first and
only ones I ever made. I will suppose a case of very exciting emotion,
and see whether it would probably take the form of poetry or prose. You
are suddenly informed that your house is on fire, and have to scramble
out of it, without stopping to tie your neck-cloth neatly or to put a
flower in your buttonhole. Do you think a poet turning out in his
night-dress, and looking on while the flames were swallowing his home and
all its contents, would express himself in this style?

          "My house is on fire!
          Bring me my lyre!
   Like the flames that rise heavenward my song shall aspire!

"He would n't do any such thing, and you know he wouldn't. He would yell
Fire! Fire! with all his might. Not much rhyming for him just yet!
Wait until the fire is put out, and he has had time to look at the
charred timbers and the ashes of his home, and in the course of a week he
may possibly spin a few rhymes about it. Or suppose he was making an
offer of his hand and heart, do you think he would declaim a versified
proposal to his Amanda, or perhaps write an impromptu on the back of his
hat while he knelt before her?

       "My beloved, to you
        I will always be true.
   Oh, pray make me happy, my love, do! do! do!

"What would Amanda think of a suitor who courted her with a rhyming
dictionary in his pocket to help him make love?"

You are right, said I,--there's nothing in the world like rhymes to cool
off a man's passion. You look at a blacksmith working on a bit of iron
or steel. Bright enough it looked while it was on the hearth, in the
midst of the sea-coal, the great bellows blowing away, and the rod or the
horse-shoe as red or as white as the burning coals. How it fizzes as it
goes into the trough of water, and how suddenly all the glow is gone! It
looks black and cold enough now. Just so with your passionate
incandescence. It is all well while it burns and scintillates in your
emotional centres, without articulate and connected expression; but the
minute you plunge it into the rhyme-trough it cools down, and becomes as
dead and dull as the cold horse-shoe. It is true that if you lay it cold
on the anvil and hammer away on it for a while it warms up somewhat.
Just so with the rhyming fellow,--he pounds away on his verses and they
warm up a little. But don't let him think that this afterglow of
composition is the same thing as the original passion. That found
expression in a few oh, oh's, eheu's, helas, helas's, and when the
passion had burned itself out you got the rhymed verses, which, as I have
said, are its ashes.

I thanked Number Seven for his poetical illustration of my thesis. There
is great good to be got out of a squinting brain, if one only knows how
to profit by it. We see only one side of the moon, you know, but a
fellow with a squinting brain seems now and then to get a peep at the
other side. I speak metaphorically. He takes new and startling views of
things we have always looked at in one particular aspect. There is a
rule invariably to be observed with one of this class of intelligences:
Never contradict a man with a squinting brain. I say a man, because I do
not think that squinting brains are nearly so common in women as they are
in men. The "eccentrics" are, I think, for the most part of the male
sex.

That leads me to say that persons with a strong instinctive tendency to
contradiction are apt to become unprofitable companions. Our thoughts
are plants that never flourish in inhospitable soils or chilling
atmospheres. They are all started under glass, so to speak; that is,
sheltered and fostered in our own warm and sunny consciousness. They
must expect some rough treatment when we lift the sash from the frame and
let the outside elements in upon them. They can bear the rain and the
breezes, and be all the better for them; but perpetual contradiction is a
pelting hailstorm, which spoils their growth and tends to kill them out
altogether.

Now stop and consider a moment. Are not almost all brains a little
wanting in bilateral symmetry? Do you not find in persons whom you love,
whom you esteem, and even admire, some marks of obliquity in mental
vision? Are there not some subjects in looking at which it seems to you
impossible that they should ever see straight? Are there not moods in
which it seems to you that they are disposed to see all things out of
plumb and in false relations with each other? If you answer these
questions in the affirmative, then you will be glad of a hint as to the
method of dealing with your friends who have a touch of cerebral
strabismus, or are liable to occasional paroxysms of perversity. Let
them have their head. Get them talking on subjects that interest them.
As a rule, nothing is more likely to serve this purpose than letting them
talk about themselves; if authors, about their writings; if artists,
about their pictures or statues; and generally on whatever they have most
pride in and think most of their own relations with.

Perhaps you will not at first sight agree with me in thinking that slight
mental obliquity is as common as I suppose. An analogy may have some
influence on your belief in this matter. Will you take the trouble to
ask your tailor how many persons have their two shoulders of the same
height? I think he will tell you that the majority of his customers show
a distinct difference of height on the two sides. Will you ask a
portrait-painter how many of those who sit to hint have both sides of
their faces exactly alike? I believe he will tell you that one side is
always a little better than the other. What will your hatter say about
the two sides of the head? Do you see equally well with both eyes, and
hear equally well with both ears? Few persons past middle age will
pretend that they do. Why should the two halves of a brain not show a
natural difference, leading to confusion of thought, and very possibly to
that instinct of contradiction of which I was speaking? A great deal of
time is lost in profitless conversation, and a good deal of ill temper
frequently caused, by not considering these organic and practically
insuperable conditions. In dealing with them, acquiescence is the best
of palliations and silence the sovereign specific.

I have been the reporter, as you have seen, of my own conversation and
that of the other Teacups. I have told some of the circumstances of
their personal history, and interested, as I hope, here and there a
reader in the fate of different members of our company. Here are our
pretty Delilah and our Doctor provided for. We may take it for granted
that it will not be very long that the young couple will have to wait;
for, as I have told you all, the Doctor is certainly getting into
business, and bids fair to have a thriving practice before he saddles his
nose with an eyeglass and begins to think of a pair of spectacles. So
that part of our little domestic drama is over, and we can only wish the
pair that is to be all manner of blessings consistent with a reasonable
amount of health in the community on whose ailings must depend their
prosperity.

All our thoughts are now concentrated on the relation existing between
Number Five and the Tutor. That there is some profound instinctive
impulse which is drawing them closer together no one who watches them can
for a moment doubt. There are two principles of attraction which bring
different natures together: that in which the two natures closely
resemble each other, and that in which one is complementary of the other.
In the first case, they coalesce, as do two drops of water or of mercury,
and become intimately blended as soon as they touch; in the other, they
rush together as an acid and an alkali unite, predestined from eternity
to find all they most needed in each other. What is the condition of
things in the growing intimacy of Number Five and the Tutor? He is many
years her junior, as we know. Both of them look that fact squarely in the
face. The presumption is against the union of two persons under these
circumstances. Presumptions are strong obstacles against any result we
wish to attain, but half our work in life is to overcome them. A great
many results look in the distance like six-foot walls, and when we get
nearer prove to be only five-foot hurdles, to be leaped over or knocked
down. Twenty years from now she may be a vigorous and active old woman,
and he a middle-aged, half-worn-out invalid, like so many overworked
scholars. Everything depends on the number of drops of the elixir vitae
which Nature mingled in the nourishment she administered to the embryo
before it tasted its mother's milk. Think of Cleopatra, the bewitching
old mischief-maker; think of Ninon de L'Enclos, whose own son fell
desperately in love with her, not knowing the relation in which she stood
to him; think of Dr. Johnson's friend, Mrs. Thrale, afterward Mrs.
Piozzi, who at the age of eighty was full enough of life to be making
love ardently and persistently to Conway, the handsome young actor. I
can readily believe that Number Five will outlive the Tutor, even if he
is fortunate enough rather in winning his way into the fortress through
gates that open to him of their own accord. If he fails in his siege, I
do really believe he will die early; not of a broken heart, exactly, but
of a heart starved, with the food it was craving close to it, but
unattainable. I have, therefore, a deep interest in knowing how Number
Five and the Tutor are getting along together. Is there any danger of
one or the other growing tired of the intimacy, and becoming willing to
get rid of it, like a garment which has shrunk and grown too tight? Is
it likely that some other attraction may come into disturb the existing
relation? The problem is to my mind not only interesting, but
exceptionally curious. You remember the story of Cymon and Iphigenia as
Dryden tells it. The poor youth has the capacity of loving, but it lies
hidden in his undeveloped nature. All at once he comes upon the sleeping
beauty, and is awakened by her charms to a hitherto unfelt consciousness.
With the advent of the new passion all his dormant faculties start into
life, and the seeming simpleton becomes the bright and intelligent lover.
The case of Number Five is as different from that of Cymon as it could
well be. All her faculties are wide awake, but one emotional side of her
nature has never been called into active exercise. Why has she never
been in love with any one of her suitors? Because she liked too many of
them. Do you happen to remember a poem printed among these papers,
entitled "I Like You and I Love You"

No one of the poems which have been placed in the urn,--that is, in the
silver sugar-bowl,--has had any name attached to it; but you could guess
pretty nearly who was the author of some of them, certainly of the one
just, referred to. Number Five was attracted to the Tutor from the first
time he spoke to her. She dreamed about him that night, and nothing
idealizes and renders fascinating one in whom we have already an interest
like dreaming of him or of her. Many a calm suitor has been made
passionate by a dream; many a passionate lover has been made wild and
half beside himself by a dream; and now and then an infatuated but
hapless lover, waking from a dream of bliss to a cold reality of
wretchedness, has helped himself to eternity before he was summoned to
the table.

Since Number Five had dreamed about the Tutor, he had been more in her
waking thoughts than she was willing to acknowledge. These thoughts were
vague, it is true,--emotions, perhaps, rather than worded trains of
ideas; but she was conscious of a pleasing excitement as his name or his
image floated across her consciousness; she sometimes sighed as she
looked over the last passage they had read from the same book, and
sometimes when they were together they were silent too long,--too long!
What were they thinking of?

And so it was all as plain sailing for Number Five and the young Tutor as
it had been for Delilah and the young Doctor, was it? Do you think so?
Then you do not understand Number Five. Many a woman has as many
atmospheric rings about her as the planet Saturn. Three are easily to be
recognized. First, there is the wide ring of attraction which draws into
itself all that once cross its outer border. These revolve about her
without ever coming any nearer. Next is the inner ring of attraction.
Those who come within its irresistible influence are drawn so close that
it seems as if they must become one with her sooner or later. But within
this ring is another,--an atmospheric girdle, one of repulsion, which
love, no matter how enterprising, no matter how prevailing or how
insinuating, has never passed, and, if we judge of what is to be by what
has been, never will. Perhaps Nature loved Number Five so well that she
grudged her to any mortal man, and gave her this inner girdle of
repulsion to guard her from all who would know her too nearly and love
her too well. Sometimes two vessels at sea keep each other company for a
long distance, it may be daring a whole voyage. Very pleasant it is to
each to have a companion to exchange signals with from time to time; to
came near enough, when the winds are light, to hold converse in ordinary
tones from deck to deck; to know that, in case of need, there's help at
hand. It is good for them to be near each other, but not good to be too
near. Woe is to them if they touch! The wreck of one or both is likely
to be the consequence. And so two well-equipped and heavily freighted
natures may be the best of companions to each other, and yet must never
attempt to come into closer union. Is this the condition of affairs
between Number Five and the Tutor? I hope not, for I want them to be
joined together in that dearest of intimacies, which, if founded in true
affinity, is the nearest approach to happiness to be looked for in our
mortal, experience. We mast wait. The Teacups will meet once more
before the circle is broken, and we may, perhaps, find the solution of
the question we have raised.

In the mean time, our young Doctor is playing truant oftener than ever.
He has brought Avis,--if we must call her so, and not Delilah,--several
times to take tea with us. It means something, in these days, to
graduate from one of our first-class academies or collegiate schools. I
shall never forget my first visit to one of these institutions. How much
its pupils know, I said, which I was never taught, and have never
learned! I was fairly frightened to see what a teaching apparatus was
provided for them. I should think the first thing to be done with most
of the husbands, they are likely to get would be to put them through a
course of instruction. The young wives must find their lords wofully
ignorant, in a large proportion of cases. When the wife has educated the
husband to such a point that she can invite him to work out a problem in
the higher mathematics or to perform a difficult chemical analysis with
her as his collaborator, as less instructed dames ask their husbands to
play a game of checkers or backgammon, they can have delightful and
instructive evenings together. I hope our young Doctor will take kindly
to his wife's (that is to be) teachings.

When the following verses were taken out of the urn, the Mistress asked
me to hand the manuscript to the young Doctor to read. I noticed that he
did not keep his eyes very closely fixed on the paper. It seemed as if
he could have recited the lines without referring to the manuscript at
all.

        AT THE TURN OF THE ROAD.

   The glory has passed from the goldenrod's plume,
   The purple-hued asters still linger in bloom;
   The birch is bright yellow, the sumachs are red,
   The maples like torches aflame overhead.

   But what if the joy of the summer is past,
   And winter's wild herald is blowing his blast?
   For me dull November is sweeter than May,
   For my love is its sunshine,--she meets me to-day!

   Will she come? Will the ring-dove return to her nest?
   Will the needle swing back from the east or the west?
   At the stroke of the hour she will be at her gate;
   A friend may prove laggard,--love never comes late.

   Do I see her afar in the distance? Not yet.
   Too early! Too early! She could not forget!
   When I cross the old bridge where the brook overflowed,
   She will flash full in sight at the turn of the road.

   I pass the low wall where the ivy entwines;
   I tread the brown pathway that leads through the pines;
   I haste by the boulder that lies in the field,
   Where her promise at parting was lovingly sealed.

   Will she come by the hillside or round through the wood?
   Will she wear her brown dress or her mantle and hood?
   The minute draws near,--but her watch may go wrong;
   My heart will be asking, What keeps her so long?

   Why doubt for a moment? More shame if I do!
   Why question? Why tremble? Are angels more true?
   She would come to the lover who calls her his own
   Though she trod in the track of a whirling cyclone!

   --I crossed the old bridge ere the minute had passed.
   I looked: lo! my Love stood before me at last.
   Her eyes, how they sparkled, her cheeks, how they glowed,
   As we met, face to face, at the turn of the road!




XII

There was a great tinkling of teaspoons the other evening, when I took my
seat at the table, where all The Teacups were gathered before my
entrance. The whole company arose, and the Mistress, speaking for them,
expressed the usual sentiment appropriate to such occasions. "Many happy
returns" is the customary formula. No matter if the object of this kind
wish is a centenarian, it is quite safe to assume that he is ready and
very willing to accept as many more years as the disposing powers may see
fit to allow him.

The meaning of it all was that this was my birthday. My friends, near
and distant, had seen fit to remember it, and to let me know in various
pleasant ways that they had not forgotten it. The tables were adorned
with flowers. Gifts of pretty and pleasing objects were displayed on a
side table. A great green wreath, which must have cost the parent oak a
large fraction of its foliage, was an object of special admiration.
Baskets of flowers which had half unpeopled greenhouses, large bouquets
of roses, fragrant bunches of pinks, and many beautiful blossoms I am not
botanist enough to name had been coming in upon me all day long. Many of
these offerings were brought by the givers in person; many came with
notes as fragrant with good wishes as the flowers they accompanied with
their natural perfumes.

How old was I, The Dictator, once known by another equally audacious
title,--I, the recipient of all these favors and honors? I had cleared
the eight-barred gate, which few come in sight of, and fewer, far fewer,
go over, a year before. I was a trespasser on the domain belonging to
another generation. The children of my coevals were fast getting gray
and bald, and their children beginning to look upon the world as
belonging to them, and not to their sires and grandsires. After that
leap over the tall barrier, it looks like a kind of impropriety to keep
on as if one were still of a reasonable age. Sometimes it seems to me
almost of the nature of a misdemeanor to be wandering about in the
preserve which the fleshless gamekeeper guards so jealously. But, on the
other hand, I remember that men of science have maintained that the
natural life of man is nearer fivescore than threescore years and ten. I
always think of a familiar experience which I bring from the French
cafes, well known to me in my early manhood. One of the illustrated
papers of my Parisian days tells it pleasantly enough.

A guest of the establishment is sitting at his little table. He has just
had his coffee, and the waiter is serving him with his petit verre. Most
of my readers know very well what a petit verre is, but there may be here
and there a virtuous abstainer from alcoholic fluids, living among the
bayberries and the sweet ferns, who is not aware that the words, as
commonly used, signify a small glass--a very small glass--of spirit,
commonly brandy, taken as a chasse-cafe, or coffee-chaser. This drinking
of brandy, "neat," I may remark by the way, is not quite so bad as it
looks. Whiskey or rum taken unmixed from a tumbler is a knock-down blow
to temperance, but the little thimbleful of brandy, or Chartreuse, or
Maraschino, is only, as it were, tweaking the nose of teetotalism.

Well,--to go back behind our brackets,--the guest is calling to the
waiter, "Garcon! et le bain de pieds!" Waiter! and the foot-bath!--The
little glass stands in a small tin saucer or shallow dish, and the custom
is to more than fill the glass, so that some extra brandy rung over into
this tin saucer or cup-plate, to the manifest gain of the consumer.

Life is a petit verre of a very peculiar kind of spirit. At seventy
years it used to be said that the little glass was full. We should be
more apt to put it at eighty in our day, while Gladstone and Tennyson and
our own Whittier are breathing, moving, thinking, writing, speaking, in
the green preserve belonging to their children and grandchildren, and
Bancroft is keeping watch of the gamekeeper in the distance. But,
returning resolutely to the petit verre, I am willing to concede that all
after fourscore is the bain de pieds,--the slopping over, so to speak, of
the full measure of life. I remember that one who was very near and dear
to me, and who lived to a great age, so that the ten-barred gate of the
century did not look very far off, would sometimes apologize in a very
sweet, natural way for lingering so long to be a care and perhaps a
burden to her children, themselves getting well into years. It is not
hard to understand the feeling, never less called for than it was in the
case of that beloved nonagenarian. I have known few persons, young or
old, more sincerely and justly regretted than the gentle lady whose
memory comes up before me as I write.

Oh, if we could all go out of flower as gracefully, as pleasingly, as we
come into blossom! I always think of the morning-glory as the loveliest
example of a graceful yielding to the inevitable. It is beautiful before
its twisted corolla opens; it is comely as it folds its petals inward,
when its brief hours of perfection are over. Women find it easier than
men to grow old in a becoming way. A very old lady who has kept
something, it may be a great deal, of her youthful feelings, who is
daintily cared for, who is grateful for the attentions bestowed upon her,
and enters into the spirit of the young lives that surround her, is as
precious to those who love her as a gem in an antique setting, the
fashion of which has long gone by, but which leaves the jewel the color
and brightness which are its inalienable qualities. With old men it is
too often different. They do not belong so much indoors as women do.
They have no pretty little manual occupations. The old lady knits or
stitches so long as her eyes and fingers will let her. The old man
smokes his pipe, but does not know what to do with his fingers, unless he
plays upon some instrument, or has a mechanical turn which finds business
for them.

But the old writer, I said to The Teacups, as I say to you, my readers,
labors under one special difficulty, which I am thinking of and
exemplifying at this moment. He is constantly tending to reflect upon
and discourse about his own particular stage of life. He feels that he
must apologize for his intrusion upon the time and thoughts of a
generation which he naturally supposes must be tired of him, if they ever
had any considerable regard for him. Now, if the world of readers hates
anything it sees in print, it is apology. If what one has to say is
worth saying, he need not beg pardon fur saying it. If it is not worth
saying I will not finish the sentence. But it is so hard to resist the
temptation, notwithstanding that the terrible line beginning "Superfluous
lags the veteran" is always repeating itself in his dull ear!

What kind of audience or reading parish is a man who secured his
constituency in middle life, or before that period, to expect when he has
reached the age of threescore and twenty? His coevals have dropped away
by scores and tens, and he sees only a few units scattered about here and
there, like the few beads above the water after a ship has gone to
pieces. Does he write and publish for those of his own time of life? He
need not print a large edition. Does he hope to secure a hearing from
those who have come into the reading world since his coevals? They have
found fresher fields and greener pastures. Their interests are in the
out-door, active world. Some of them are circumnavigating the planet
while he is hitching his rocking chair about his hearth-rug. Some are
gazing upon the pyramids while he is staring at his andirons. Some are
settling the tariff and fixing the laws of suffrage and taxation while he
is dozing over the weather bulletin, and going to sleep over the
obituaries in his morning or evening paper.

Nature is wiser than we give her credit for being; never wiser than in
her dealings with the old. She has no idea of mortifying them by sudden
and wholly unexpected failure of the chief servants of consciousness.
The sight, for instance, begins to lose something of its perfection long
before its deficiency calls the owner's special attention to it. Very
probably, the first hint we have of the change is that a friend makes the
pleasing remark that we are "playing the trombone," as he calls it; that
is, moving a book we are holding backward and forward, to get the right
focal distance. Or it may be we find fault with the lamp or the
gas-burner for not giving so much light as it used to. At last,
somewhere between forty and fifty, we begin to dangle a jaunty pair of
eye-glasses, half plaything and half necessity. In due time a pair of
sober, business-like spectacles bestrides the nose. Old age leaps upon
it as his saddle, and rides triumphant, unchallenged, until the darkness
comes which no glasses can penetrate. Nature is pitiless in carrying out
the universal sentence, but very pitiful in her mode of dealing with the
condemned on his way to the final scene. The man who is to be hanged
always has a good breakfast provided for him.

Do not think that the old look upon themselves as the helpless, hopeless,
forlorn creatures which they seem to young people. Do these young folks
suppose that all vanity dies out of the natures of old men and old women?
A dentist of olden time told me that a good-looking young man once said
to him, "Keep that incisor presentable, if you can, till I am fifty, and
then I sha'n't care how I look." I venture to say that that gentleman
was as particular about his personal appearance and as proud of his good
looks at fifty, and many years after fifty, as he was in the twenties,
when he made that speech to the dentist.

My dear friends around the teacups, and at that wider board where I am
now entertaining, or trying to entertain, my company, is it not as plain
to you as it is to me that I had better leave such tasks as that which I
am just finishing to those who live in a more interesting period of life
than one which, in the order of nature, is next door to decrepitude?
Ought I not to regret having undertaken to report the doings and sayings
of the members of the circle which you have known as The Teacups?

Dear, faithful reader, whose patient eyes have followed my reports
through these long months, you and I are about parting company. Perhaps
you are one of those who have known me under another name, in those
far-off days separated from these by the red sea of the great national
conflict. When you first heard the tinkle of the teaspoons, as the table
was being made ready for its guests, you trembled for me, in the kindness
of your hearts. I do not wonder that you did,--I trembled for myself.
But I remembered the story of Sir Cloudesley Shovel, who was seen all of
a tremor just as he was going into action. "How is this?" said a brother
officer to him. "Surely you are not afraid?" "No," he answered, "but my
flesh trembles at the thought of the dangers into which my intrepid
spirit will carry me." I knew the risk of undertaking to carry through a
series of connected papers. And yet I thought it was better to run that
risk, more manly, more sensible, than to give way to the fears which made
my flesh tremble as did Sir Cloudesley Shovel's. For myself the labor
has been a distraction, and one which came at a time when it was needed.
Sometimes, as in one of those poems recently published,--the reader will
easily guess which,--the youthful spirit has come over me with such a
rush that it made me feel just as I did when I wrote the history of the
"One-hoss Shay" thirty years ago. To repeat one of my comparisons, it
was as if an early fruit had ripened on a graft upon an old, steady-going
tree, to the astonishment of all its later-maturing products. I should
hardly dare to say so much as this if I had not heard a similar opinion
expressed by others.

Once committed to my undertaking, there was no turning back. It is true
that I had said I might stop at any moment, but after one or two numbers
it seemed as if there were an informal pledge to carry the series on, as
in former cases, until I had completed my dozen instalments.

Writers and speakers have their idiosyncrasies, their habits, their
tricks, if you had rather call them so, as to their ways of writing and
speaking. There is a very old and familiar story, accompanied by a
feeble jest, which most of my readers may probably enough have met with
in Joe Miller or elsewhere. It is that of a lawyer who could never make
an argument without having a piece of thread to work upon with his
fingers while he was pleading. Some one stole it from him one day, and
he could not get on at all with his speech,--he had lost the thread of
his discourse, as the story had it. Now this is what I myself once saw.
It was at a meeting where certain grave matters were debated in an
assembly of professional men. A speaker, whom I never heard before or
since, got up and made a long and forcible argument. I do not think he
was a lawyer, but he spoke as if he had been trained to talk to juries.
He held a long string in one hand, which he drew through the other band
incessantly, as he spoke, just as a shoe maker performs the motion of
waxing his thread. He appeared to be dependent on this motion. The
physiological significance of the fact I suppose to be that the flow of
what we call the nervous current from the thinking centre to the organs
of speech was rendered freer and easier by the establishment of a
simultaneous collateral nervous current to the set of muscles concerned
in the action I have described.

I do not use a string to help me write or speak, but I must have its
equivalent. I must have my paper and pen or pencil before me to set my
thoughts flowing in such form that they can be written continuously.
There have been lawyers who could think out their whole argument in
connected order without a single note. There are authors,--and I think
there are many,--who can compose and finish off a poem or a story without
writing a word of it until, when the proper time comes, they copy what
they carry in their heads. I have been told that Sir Edwin Arnold
thought out his beautiful "Light of Asia" in this way.

I find the great charm of writing consists in its surprises. When one is
in the receptive attitude of mind, the thoughts which are sprung upon
him, the images which flash through his--consciousness, are a delight and
an excitement. I am impatient of every hindrance in setting down my
thoughts,--of a pen that will not write, of ink that will not flow, of
paper that will not receive the ink. And here let me pay the tribute
which I owe to one of the humblest but most serviceable of my assistants,
especially in poetical composition. Nothing seems more prosaic than the
stylographic pen. It deprives the handwriting of its beauty, and to some
extent of its individual character. The brutal communism of the letters
it forms covers the page it fills with the most uniformly uninteresting
characters. But, abuse it as much as you choose, there is nothing like
it for the poet, for the imaginative writer. Many a fine flow of thought
has been checked, perhaps arrested, by the ill behavior of a goose-quill.
Many an idea has escaped while the author was dipping his pen in the
inkstand. But with the stylographic pen, in the hands of one who knows
how to care for it and how to use it, unbroken rhythms and harmonious
cadences are the natural products of the unimpeded flow of the fluid
which is the vehicle of the author's thoughts and fancies. So much for my
debt of gratitude to the humble stylographic pen. It does not furnish
the proper medium for the correspondence of intimates, who wish to see as
much of their friends' personality as their handwriting can hold,--still
less for the impassioned interchange of sentiments between lovers; but in
writing for the press its use is open to no objection. Its movement over
the paper is like the flight of a swallow, while the quill pen and the
steel pen and the gold pen are all taking short, laborious journeys, and
stopping to drink every few minutes.

A chief pleasure which the author of novels and stories experiences is
that of becoming acquainted with the characters be draws. It is
perfectly true that his characters must, in the nature of things, have
more or less of himself in their composition. If I should seek an
exemplification of this in the person of any of my Teacups, I should find
it most readily in the one whom I have called Number Seven, the one with
the squinting brain. I think that not only I, the writer, but many of my
readers, recognize in our own mental constitution an occasional obliquity
of perception, not always detected at the time, but plain enough when
looked back upon. What extravagant fancies you and I have seriously
entertained at one time or another! What superstitious notions have got
into our heads and taken possession of its empty chambers,--or, in the
language of science, seized on the groups of nerve-cells in some of the
idle cerebral convolutions!

The writer, I say, becomes acquainted with his characters as he goes on.
They are at first mere embryos, outlines of distinct personalities. By
and by, if they have any organic cohesion, they begin to assert
themselves. They can say and do such and such things; such and such
other things they cannot and must not say or do. The story-writer's and
play-writer's danger is that they will get their characters mixed, and
make A say what B ought to have said. The stronger his imaginative
faculty, the less liable will the writer be to this fault; but not even
Shakespeare's power of throwing himself into his characters prevents many
of his different personages from talking philosophy in the same strain
and in a style common to them all.

You will often observe that authors fall in love with the imaginary
persons they describe, and that they bestow affectionate epithets upon
them which it may happen the reader does not consider in any way called
for. This is a pleasure to which they have a right. Every author of a
story is surrounded by a little family of ideal children, as dear to him,
it may be, as are flesh-and-blood children to their parents. You may
forget all about the circle of Teacups to which I have introduced
you,--on the supposition that you have followed me with some degree of
interest; but do you suppose that Number Five does not continue as a
presence with me, and that my pretty Delilah has left me forever because
she is going to be married?

No, my dear friend, our circle will break apart, and its different
members will soon be to you as if they had never been. But do you think
that I can forget them? Do you suppose that I shall cease to follow the
love (or the loves; which do you think is the true word, the singular or
the plural?) of Number Five and the young Tutor who is so constantly
found in her company? Do you suppose that I do not continue my relations
with the "Cracked Teacup,"--the poor old fellow with whom I have so much
in common, whose counterpart, perhaps, you may find in your own complex
personality?

I take from the top shelf of the hospital department of my library--the
section devoted to literary cripples, imbeciles, failures, foolish
rhymesters, and silly eccentrics--one of the least conspicuous and most
hopelessly feeble of the weak-minded population of that intellectual
almshouse. I open it and look through its pages. It is a story. I have
looked into it once before,--on its first reception as a gift from the
author. I try to recall some of the names I see there: they mean nothing
to me, but I venture to say the author cherishes them all, and cries over
them as he did when he was writing their history. I put the book back
among its dusty companions, and, sitting down in my reflective
rocking-chair, think how others must forget, and how I shall remember,
the company that gathered about this table.

Shall I ever meet any one of them again, in these pages or in any other?
Will the cracked Teacup hold together, or will he go to pieces, and find
himself in that retreat where the owner of the terrible clock which drove
him crazy is walking under the shelter of the high walls? Has the young
Doctor's crown yet received the seal which is Nature's warrant of wisdom
and proof of professional competency? And Number Five and her young
friend the Tutor,--have they kept on in their dangerous intimacy? Did
they get through the tutto tremante passage, reading from the same old
large edition of Dante which the Tutor recommended as the best, and in
reading from which their heads were necessarily brought perilously near
to each other?

It would be very pleasant if I could, consistently with the present state
of affairs, bring these two young people together. I say two young
people, for the one who counts most years seems to me to be really the
younger of the pair. That Number Five foresaw from the first that any
tenderer feeling than that of friendship would intrude itself between
them I do not believe. As for the Tutor, he soon found where he was
drifting. It was his first experience in matters concerning the heart,
and absorbed his whole nature as a thing of course. Did he tell her he
loved her? Perhaps he did, fifty times; perhaps he never had the courage
to say so outright. But sometimes they looked each other straight in the
eyes, and strange messages seemed to pass from one consciousness to the
other. Will the Tutor ask Number Five to be his wife; and if he does,
will she yield to the dictates of nature, and lower the flag of that
fortress so long thought impregnable? Will he go on writing such poems
to her as "The Rose and the Fern" or "I Like You and I Love You," and be
content with the pursuit of that which he never can attain? That is all
very well, on the "Grecian Urn" of Keats,--beautiful, but not love such
as mortals demand. Still, that may be all, for aught that we have yet
seen.

   "Fair youth, beneath the trees, thou canst not leave
   Thy song, nor ever can those trees be bare;
   Bold lover, never, never, canst thou kiss,
   Though winning near the goal,--yet do not grieve;
   She cannot fade, though thou hast not thy bliss,
   Forever wilt thou love, and she be fair!

        .........................

   "More happy love! more happy, happy love!
   Forever warm, and still to be enjoyed,
   Forever panting and forever young!"

And so, good-bye, young people, whom we part with here. Shadows you have
been and are to my readers; very real you have been and are to me,--as
real as the memories of many friends whom I shall see no more.

As I am not in the habit of indulging in late suppers, the reader need
not think that I shall spread another board and invite him to listen to
the conversations which take place around it. If, from time to time, he
finds a slight refection awaiting him on the sideboard, I hope he may
welcome it as pleasantly as he has accepted what I have offered him from
the board now just being cleared.

        ..........................

It is a good rule for the actor who manages the popular street drama of
Punch not to let the audience or spectators see his legs. It is very
hard for the writer of papers like these, which are now coming to their
conclusion, to keep his personality from showing itself too conspicuously
through the thin disguises of his various characters. As the show is now
over, as the curtain has fallen, I appear before it in my proper person,
to address a few words to the friends who have assisted, as the French
say, by their presence, and as we use the word, by the kind way in which
they have received my attempts at their entertainment.

This series of papers is the fourth of its kind which I have offered to
my readers. I may be allowed to look back upon the succession of serial
articles which was commenced more than thirty years ago, in 1857. "The
Autocrat of the Breakfast-Table" was the first of the series. It was
begun without the least idea what was to be its course and its outcome.
Its characters shaped themselves gradually as the manuscript grew under
my hand. I jotted down on the sheet of blotting paper before me the
thoughts and fancies which came into my head. A very odd-looking object
was this page of memoranda. Many of the hints were worked up into formal
shape, many were rejected. Sometimes I recorded a story, a jest, or a pun
for consideration, and made use of it or let it alone as my second
thought decided. I remember a curious coincidence, which, if I have ever
told in print,--I am not sure whether I have or not,--I will tell over
again. I mention it, not for the pun, which I rejected as not very
edifying and perhaps not new, though I did not recollect having seen it.

Mulier, Latin for woman; why apply that name to one of the gentle but
occasionally obstinate sex? The answer was that a woman is (sometimes)
more mulish than a mule. Please observe that I did not like the poor pun
very well, and thought it rather rude and inelegant. So I left it on the
blotter, where it was standing when one of the next numbers of "Punch"
came out and contained that very same pun, which must have been hit upon
by some English contributor at just about the same time I fell upon it on
this side of the Atlantic. This fact may be added to the chapter of
coincidences which belongs to the first number of this series of papers.

The "Autocrat" had the attraction of novelty, which of course was wanting
in the succeeding papers of similar character. The criticisms upon the
successive numbers as they came out were various, but generally
encouraging. Some were more than encouraging; very high-colored in their
phrases of commendation. When the papers were brought together in a
volume their success was beyond my expectations. Up to the present time
the "Autocrat" has maintained its position. An immortality of a whole
generation is more than most writers are entitled to expect. I venture
to think, from the letters I receive from the children and grandchildren
of my first set of readers, that for some little time longer, at least,
it will continue to be read, and even to be a favorite with some of its
readers. Non omnis moriar is a pleasant thought to one who has loved his
poor little planet, and will, I trust, retain kindly recollections of it
through whatever wilderness of worlds he may be called to wander in his
future pilgrimages. I say "poor little planet." Ever since I had a ten
cent look at the transit of Venus, a few years ago, through the telescope
in the Mall, the earth has been wholly different to me from what it used
to be. I knew from books what a speck it is in the universe, but nothing
ever brought the fact home like the sight of the sister planet sailing
across the sun's disk, about large enough for a buckshot, not large
enough for a full-sized bullet. Yes, I love the little globule where I
have spent more than fourscore years, and I like to think that some of my
thoughts and some of my emotions may live themselves over again when I am
sleeping. I cannot thank all the kind readers of the "Autocrat" who are
constantly sending me their acknowledgments. If they see this printed
page, let them be assured that a writer is always rendered happier by
being told that he has made a fellow-being wiser or better, or even
contributed to his harmless entertainment. This a correspondent may take
for granted, even if his letter of grateful recognition receives no
reply. It becomes more and more difficult for me to keep up with my
correspondents, and I must soon give it up as impossible.

"The Professor at the Breakfast Table" followed immediately on the heels
of the "Autocrat." The Professor was the alter ego of the first
personage. In the earlier series he had played a secondary part, and in
this second series no great effort was made to create a character wholly
unlike the first. The Professor was more outspoken, however, on
religious subjects, and brought down a good deal of hard language on
himself and the author to whom he owed his existence. I suppose he may
have used some irritating expressions, unconsciously, but not
unconscientiously, I am sure. There is nothing harder to forgive than
the sting of an epigram. Some of the old doctors, I fear, never pardoned
me for saying that if a ship, loaded with an assorted cargo of the drugs
which used to be considered the natural food of sick people, went to the
bottom of the sea, it would be "all the better for mankind and all the
worse for the fishes." If I had not put that snapper on the end of my
whip-lash, I might have got off without the ill temper which my
antithesis provoked. Thirty years set that all right, and the same
thirty years have so changed the theological atmosphere that such abusive
words as "heretic" and "infidel," applied to persons who differ from the
old standards of faith, are chiefly interesting as a test of breeding,
being seldom used by any people above the social half-caste line. I am
speaking of Protestants; how it may be among Roman Catholics I do not
know, but I suspect that with them also it is a good deal a matter of
breeding. There were not wanting some who liked the Professor better
than the Autocrat. I confess that I prefer my champagne in its first
burst of gaseous enthusiasm; but if my guest likes it better after it has
stood awhile, I am pleased to accommodate him. The first of my series
came from my mind almost with an explosion, like the champagne cork; it
startled me a little to see what I had written, and to hear what people
said about it. After that first explosion the flow was more sober, and I
looked upon the product of my wine-press more coolly. Continuations
almost always sag a little. I will not say that of my own second effort,
but if others said it, I should not be disposed to wonder at or to
dispute them.

"The Poet at the Breakfast Table" came some years later. This series of
papers was not so much a continuation as a resurrection. It was a doubly
hazardous attempt, made without any extravagant expectations, and was
received as well as I had any right to anticipate. It differed from the
other two series in containing a poem of considerable length, published
in successive portions. This poem holds a good deal of self-communing,
and gave me the opportunity of expressing some thoughts and feelings not
to be found elsewhere in my writings. I had occasion to read the whole
volume, not long since, in preparation for a new edition, and was rather
more pleased with it than I had expected to be. An old author is
constantly rediscovering himself in the more or less fossilized productions
of his earlier years. It is a long time since I have read the
"Autocrat," but I take it up now and then and read in it for a few
minutes, not always without some degree of edification.

These three series of papers, "Autocrat," "Professor," "Poet," are all
studies of life from somewhat different points of view. They are largely
made up of sober reflections, and appeared to me to require some lively
human interest to save them from wearisome didactic dulness. What could
be more natural than that love should find its way among the young people
who helped to make up the circle gathered around the table? Nothing is
older than the story of young love. Nothing is newer than that same old
story. A bit of gilding here and there has a wonderful effect in
enlivening a landscape or an apartment. Napoleon consoled the Parisians
in their year of defeat by gilding the dome of the Invalides. Boston has
glorified her State House and herself at the expense of a few sheets of
gold leaf laid on the dome, which shines like a sun in the eyes of her
citizens, and like a star in those of the approaching traveller. I think
the gilding of a love-story helped all three of these earlier papers. The
same need I felt in the series of papers just closed. The slight
incident of Delilah's appearance and disappearance served my purpose to
some extent. But what should I do with Number Five? The reader must
follow out her career for himself. For myself, I think that she and the
Tutor have both utterly forgotten the difference of their years in the
fascination of intimate intercourse. I do not believe that a nature so
large, so rich in affection, as Number Five's is going to fall defeated
of its best inheritance of life, like a vine which finds no support for
its tendrils to twine around, and so creeps along the ground from which
nature meant that love should lift it. I feel as if I ought to follow
these two personages of my sermonizing story until they come together or
separate, to fade, to wither,--perhaps to die, at last, of something like
what the doctors call heart-failure, but which might more truly be called
heart-starvation. When I say die, I do not mean necessarily the death
that goes into the obituary column. It may come to that, in one or both;
but I think that, if they are never united, Number Five will outlive the
Tutor, who will fall into melancholy ways, and pine and waste, while she
lives along, feeling all the time that she has cheated herself of
happiness. I hope that is not going to be their fortune, or misfortune.
Vieille fille fait jeune mariee. What a youthful bride Number Five would
be, if she could only make up her mind to matrimony! In the mean time
she must be left with her lambs all around her. May heaven temper the
winds to them, for they have been shorn very close, every one of them, of
their golden fleece of aspirations and anticipations.

I must avail myself of this opportunity to say a few words to my distant
friends who take interest enough in my writings, early or recent, to wish
to enter into communication with me by letter, or to keep up a
communication already begun. I have given notice in print that the
letters, books, and manuscripts which I receive by mail are so numerous
that if I undertook to read and answer them all I should have little time
for anything else. I have for some years depended on the assistance of a
secretary, but our joint efforts have proved unable, of late, to keep
down the accumulations which come in with every mail. So many of the
letters I receive are of a pleasant character that it is hard to let them
go unacknowledged. The extreme friendliness which pervades many of them
gives them a value which I rate very highly. When large numbers of
strangers insist on claiming one as a friend, on the strength of what he
has written, it tends to make him think of himself somewhat indulgently.
It is the most natural thing in the world to want to give expression to
the feeling the loving messages from far-off unknown friends must excite.
Many a day has had its best working hours broken into, spoiled for all
literary work, by the labor of answering correspondents whose good
opinion it is gratifying to have called forth, but who were unconsciously
laying a new burden on shoulders already aching. I know too well that
what I say will not reach the eyes of many who might possibly take a hint
from it. Still I must keep repeating it before breaking off suddenly and
leaving whole piles of letters unanswered. I have been very heavily
handicapped for many years. It is partly my own fault. From what my
correspondents tell me, I must infer that I have established a dangerous
reputation for willingness to answer all sorts of letters. They come
with such insinuating humility,--they cannot bear to intrude upon my
time, they know that I have a great many calls upon it,--and
incontinently proceed to lay their additional weight on the load which is
breaking my back.

The hypocrisy of kind-hearted people is one of the most painful
exhibitions of human weakness. It has occurred to me that it might be
profitable to reproduce some of my unwritten answers to correspondents.
If those which were actually written and sent were to be printed in
parallel columns with those mentally formed but not written out responses
and comments, the reader would get some idea of the internal conflicts an
honest and not unamiable person has to go through, when he finds himself
driven to the wall by a correspondence which is draining his vocabulary
to find expressions that sound as agreeably, and signify as little, as
the phrases used by a diplomatist in closing an official communication.

No. 1. Want my autograph, do you? And don't know how to spell my name.
An a for an e in my middle name. Leave out the l in my last name. Do
you know how people hate to have their names misspelled? What do you
suppose are the sentiments entertained by the Thompsons with a p towards
those who address them in writing as Thomson?

No. 2. Think the lines you mention are by far the best I ever wrote,
hey? Well, I didn't write those lines. What is more, I think they are
as detestable a string of rhymes as I could wish my worst enemy had
written. A very pleasant frame of mind I am in for writing a letter,
after reading yours!

No. 3. I am glad to hear that my namesake, whom I never saw and never
expect to see, has cut another tooth; but why write four pages on the
strength of that domestic occurrence?

No. 4. You wish to correct an error in my Broomstick poem, do you? You
give me to understand that Wilmington is not in Essex County, but in
Middlesex. Very well; but are they separated by running water? Because
if they are not, what could hinder a witch from crossing the line that
separates Wilmington from Andover, I should like to know? I never meant
to imply that the witches made no excursions beyond the district which
was more especially their seat of operations.

As I come towards the end of this task which I had set myself, I wish, of
course, that I could have performed it more to my own satisfaction and
that of my readers. This is a feeling which almost every one must have
at the conclusion of any work he has undertaken. A common and very simple
reason for this disappointment is that most of us overrate our capacity.
We expect more of ourselves than we have any right to, in virtue of our
endowments. The figurative descriptions of the last Grand Assize must no
more be taken literally than the golden crowns, which we do not expect or
want to wear on our heads, or the golden harps, which we do not want or
expect to hold in our hands. Is it not too true that many religious
sectaries think of the last tribunal complacently, as the scene in which
they are to have the satisfaction of saying to the believers of a creed
different from their own, "I told you so"? Are not others oppressed with
the thought of the great returns which will be expected of them as the
product of their great gifts, the very limited amount of which they do
not suspect, and will be very glad to learn, even at the expense of their
self-love, when they are called to their account? If the ways of the
Supreme Being are ever really to be "justified to men," to use Milton's
expression, every human being may expect an exhaustive explanation of
himself. No man is capable of being his own counsel, and I cannot help
hoping that the ablest of the, archangels will be retained for the
defence of the worst of sinners. He himself is unconscious of the
agencies which made him what he is. Self-determining he may be, if you
will, but who determines the self which is the proximate source of the
determination? Why was the A self like his good uncle in bodily aspect
and mental and moral qualities, and the B self like the bad uncle in look
and character? Has not a man a right to ask this question in the here or
in the hereafter,--in this world or in any world in which he may find
himself? If the All-wise wishes to satisfy his reasonable and reasoning
creatures, it will not be by a display of elemental convulsions, but by
the still small voice, which treats with him as a dependent entitled to
know the meaning of his existence, and if there was anything wrong in his
adjustment to the moral and spiritual conditions of the world around him
to have full allowance made for it. No melodramatic display of warring
elements, such as the white-robed Second Adventist imagines, can meet the
need of the human heart. The thunders and lightnings of Sinai terrified
and impressed the more timid souls of the idolatrous and rebellious
caravan which the great leader was conducting, but a far nobler
manifestation of divinity was that when "the Lord spake unto Moses face
to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend."

I find the burden and restrictions of rhyme more and more troublesome as
I grow older. There are times when it seems natural enough to employ
that form of expression, but it is only occasionally; and the use of it
as the vehicle of the commonplace is so prevalent that one is not much
tempted to select it as the medium for his thoughts and emotions. The
art of rhyming has almost become a part of a high-school education, and
its practice is far from being an evidence of intellectual distinction.
Mediocrity is as much forbidden to the poet in our days as it was in
those of Horace, and the immense majority of the verses written are
stamped with hopeless mediocrity.

When one of the ancient poets found he was trying to grind out verses
which came unwillingly, he said he was writing--

        INVITA MINERVA.

   Vex not the Muse with idle prayers,
   --She will not hear thy call;
   She steals upon thee unawares,
   Or seeks thee not at all.

   Soft as the moonbeams when they sought
   Endymion's fragrant bower,
   She parts the whispering leaves of thought
   To show her full-blown flower.

   For thee her wooing hour has passed,
   The singing birds have flown,
   And winter comes with icy blast
   To chill thy buds unblown.

   Yet, though the woods no longer thrill
   As once their arches rung,
   Sweet echoes hover round thee still
   Of songs thy summer sung.

   Live in thy past; await no more
   The rush of heaven-sent wings;
   Earth still has music left in store
   While Memory sighs and sings.

I hope my special Minerva may not always be unwilling, but she must not
be called upon as she has been in times past. Now that the teacups have
left the table, an occasional evening call is all that my readers must
look for. Thanking them for their kind companionship, and hoping that I
may yet meet them in the now and then in the future, I bid them goodbye
for the immediate present, then in the future, I bid them goodbye for the
immediate present.






ELSIE VENNER

By Oliver Wendell Holmes



PREFACE.

This tale was published in successive parts in the "Atlantic Monthly,"
under the name of "The Professor's Story," the first number having
appeared in the third week of December, 1859.  The critic who is curious
in coincidences must refer to the Magazine for the date of publication of
the chapter he is examining.

In calling this narrative a "romance," the Author wishes to make sure of
being indulged in the common privileges of the poetic license. Through
all the disguise of fiction a grave scientific doctrine may be detected
lying beneath some of the delineations of character.  He has used this
doctrine as a part of the machinery of his story without pledging his
absolute belief in it to the extent to which it is asserted or implied.
It was adopted as a convenient medium of truth rather than as an accepted
scientific conclusion.  The reader must judge for himself what is the
value of various stories cited from old authors.  He must decide how much
of what has been told he can accept either as having actually happened,
or as possible and more or less probable.  The Author must be permitted,
however, to say here, in his personal character, and as responsible to
the students of the human mind and body, that since this story has been
in progress he has received the most startling confirmation of the
possibility of the existence of a character like that which he had drawn
as a purely imaginary conception in Elsie Venner.

BOSTON, January, 1861.




A SECOND PREFACE.

This is the story which a dear old lady, my very good friend, spoke of as
"a medicated novel," and quite properly refused to read.  I was always
pleased with her discriminating criticism.  It is a medicated novel, and
if she wished to read for mere amusement and helpful recreation there was
no need of troubling herself with a story written with a different end in
view.

This story has called forth so many curious inquiries that it seems worth
while to answer the more important questions which have occurred to its
readers.

In the first place, it is not based on any well-ascertained physiological
fact.  There are old fables about patients who have barked like dogs or
crowed like cocks, after being bitten or wounded by those animals.  There
is nothing impossible in the idea that Romulus and Remus may have imbibed
wolfish traits of character from the wet nurse the legend assigned them,
but the legend is not sound history, and the supposition is nothing more
than a speculative fancy.  Still, there is a limbo of curious evidence
bearing on the subject of pre-natal influences sufficient to form the
starting-point of an imaginative composition.

The real aim, of the story was to test the doctrine of "original sin" and
human responsibility for the disordered volition coming under that
technical denomination.  Was Elsie Venner, poisoned by the venom of a
crotalus before she was born, morally responsible for the "volitional"
aberrations, which translated into acts become what is known as sin, and,
it may be, what is punished as crime?  If, on presentation of the
evidence, she becomes by the verdict of the human conscience a proper
object of divine pity and not of divine wrath, as a subject of moral
poisoning, wherein lies the difference between her position at the bar of
judgment, human or divine, and that of the unfortunate victim who
received a moral poison from a remote ancestor before he drew his first
breath?

It might be supposed that the character of Elsie Veneer was suggested by
some of the fabulous personages of classical or mediaeval story. I
remember that a French critic spoke of her as cette pauvre Melusine.  I
ought to have been ashamed, perhaps, but I had, not the slightest idea
who Melusina was until I hunted up the story, and found that she was a
fairy, who for some offence was changed every Saturday to a serpent from
her waist downward.  I was of course familiar with Keats's Lamia, another
imaginary being, the subject of magical transformation into a serpent.
My story was well advanced before Hawthorne's wonderful "Marble Faun,"
which might be thought to have furnished me with the hint of a mixed
nature,--human, with an alien element,--was published or known to me.  So
that my poor heroine found her origin, not in fable or romance, but in a
physiological conception fertilized by a theological dogma.

I had the dissatisfaction of enjoying from a quiet corner a well-meant
effort to dramatize "Elsie Veneer."  Unfortunately, a physiological
romance, as I knew beforehand, is hardly adapted for the melodramatic
efforts of stage representation.  I can therefore say, with perfect
truth, that I was not disappointed.  It is to the mind, and not to the
senses, that such a story must appeal, and all attempts to render the
character and events objective on the stage, or to make them real by
artistic illustrations, are almost of necessity failures.  The story has
won the attention and enjoyed the favor of a limited class of readers,
and if it still continues to interest others of the same tastes and
habits of thought I can ask nothing more of it.

January 23, 1883.




PREFACE TO THE NEW EDITION.

I have nothing of importance to add to the two preceding Prefaces. The
continued call for this story, which was not written for popularity, but
with a very serious purpose, has somewhat surprised and, I need not add,
gratified me.  I can only restate the motive idea of the tale in a little
different language.  Believing, as I do, that our prevailing theologies
are founded upon an utterly false view of the relation of man to his
Creator, I attempted to illustrate the doctrine of inherited moral
responsibility for other people's misbehavior.  I tried to make out a
case for my poor Elsie, whom the most hardened theologian would find it
hard to blame for her inherited ophidian tastes and tendencies.  How,
then, is he to blame mankind for inheriting "sinfulness" from their first
parents?  May not the serpent have bitten Eve before the birth of Cain,
her first-born?  That would have made an excuse for Cain's children, as
Elsie's ante-natal misfortune made an excuse for her.  But what
difference does it make in the child's responsibility whether his
inherited tendencies come from a snake-bite or some other source which he
knew nothing about and could not have prevented from acting?  All this is
plain enough, and the only use of the story is to bring the dogma of
inherited guilt and its consequences into a clearer point of view.

But, after all, the tale must have proved readable as a story to account
for the large number of editions which it has reached.

Some readers have been curious about the locality the writer was thought
to have in view.  No particular place was intended.  Some of the
characters may have been thought to have been drawn from life; but the
personages mentioned are mostly composites, like Mr. Galton's compound
photographic likenesses, and are not calculated to provoke scandal or
suits for libel.

O. W. H.

BEVERLY FARMS, MASS., August 3, 1891.




ELSIE VENNER.




CHAPTER I.

THE BRAHMIN CASTE OF NEW ENGLAND.

There is nothing in New England corresponding at all to the feudal
aristocracies of the Old World.  Whether it be owing to the stock from
which we were derived, or to the practical working of our institutions,
or to the abrogation of the technical "law of honor," which draws a sharp
line between the personally responsible class of "gentlemen" and the
unnamed multitude of those who are not expected to risk their lives for
an abstraction,--whatever be the cause, we have no such aristocracy here
as that which grew up out of the military systems of the Middle Ages.

What we mean by "aristocracy" is merely the richer part of the community,
that live in the tallest houses, drive real carriages, (not "kerridges,")
kidglove their hands, and French-bonnet their ladies' heads, give parties
where the persons who call them by the above title are not invited, and
have a provokingly easy way of dressing, walking, talking, and nodding to
people, as if they felt entirely at home, and would not be embarrassed in
the least, if they met the Governor, or even the President of the United
States, face to face.  Some of these great folks are really well-bred,
some of them are only purse-proud and assuming,--but they form a class,
and are named as above in the common speech.

It is in the nature of large fortunes to diminish rapidly, when
subdivided and distributed.  A million is the unit of wealth, now and
here in America.  It splits into four handsome properties; each of these
into four good inheritances; these, again, into scanty competences for
four ancient maidens,--with whom it is best the family should die out,
unless it can begin again as its great-grandfather did.  Now a million is
a kind of golden cheese, which represents in a compendious form the
summer's growth of a fat meadow of craft or commerce; and as this kind of
meadow rarely bears more than one crop, it is pretty certain that sons
and grandsons will not get another golden cheese out of it, whether they
milk the same cows or turn in new ones.  In other words, the
millionocracy, considered in a large way, is not at all an affair of
persons and families, but a perpetual fact of money with a variable human
element, which a philosopher might leave out of consideration without
falling into serious error.  Of course, this trivial and, fugitive fact
of personal wealth does not create a permanent class, unless some special
means are taken to arrest the process of disintegration in the third
generation.  This is so rarely done, at least successfully, that one need
not live a very long life to see most of the rich families he knew in
childhood more or less reduced, and the millions shifted into the hands
of the country-boys who were sweeping stores and carrying parcels when
the now decayed gentry were driving their chariots, eating their venison
over silver chafing-dishes, drinking Madeira chilled in embossed coolers,
wearing their hair in powder, and casing their legs in long boots with
silken tassels.

There is, however, in New England, an aristocracy, if you choose to call
it so, which has a far greater character of permanence.  It has grown to
be a caste,--not in any odious sense;--but, by the repetition of the same
influences, generation after generation, it has acquired a distinct
organization and physiognomy, which not to recognize is mere stupidity,
and not to be willing to describe would show a distrust of the
good-nature and intelligence of our readers, who like to have us see all
we can and tell all we see.

If you will look carefully at any class of students in one of our
colleges, you will have no difficulty in selecting specimens of two
different aspects of youthful manhood.  Of course I shall choose extreme
cases to illustrate the contrast between them.  In the first, the figure
is perhaps robust, but often otherwise,--inelegant, partly from careless
attitudes, partly from ill-dressing,--the face is uncouth in feature, or
at least common,--the mouth coarse and unformed,--the eye unsympathetic,
even if bright,--the movements of the face are clumsy, like those of the
limbs,--the voice is unmusical,--and the enunciation as if the words were
coarse castings, instead of fine carvings.  The youth of the other aspect
is commonly slender, his face is smooth, and apt to be pallid,--his
features are regular and of a certain delicacy,--his eye is bright and
quick,--his lips play over the thought he utters as a pianist's fingers
dance over their music, and his whole air, though it may be timid, and
even awkward, has nothing clownish.  If you are a teacher, you know what
to expect from each of these young men.  With equal willingness, the
first will be slow at learning; the second will take to his books as a
pointer or a setter to his field-work.

The first youth is the common country-boy, whose race has been bred to
bodily labor.  Nature has adapted the family organization to the kind of
life it has lived.  The hands and feet by constant use have got more than
their share of development,--the organs of thought and expression less
than their share.  The finer instincts are latent and must be developed.
A youth of this kind is raw material in its first stage of elaboration.
You must not expect too much of any such. Many of them have force of will
and character, and become distinguished in practical life; but very few
of them ever become great scholars.  A scholar is, in a large proportion
of cases, the son of scholars or scholarly persons.

That is exactly what the other young man is.  He comes of the Brahmin
caste of New England.  This is the harmless, inoffensive, untitled
aristocracy referred to, and which many readers will at once acknowledge.
There are races of scholars among us, in which aptitude for learning, and
all these marks of it I have spoken of, are congenital and hereditary.
Their names are always on some college catalogue or other.  They break
out every generation or two in some learned labor which calls them up
after they seem to have died out. At last some newer name takes their
place, it maybe,--but you inquire a little and you find it is the blood
of the Edwardses or the Chauncys or the Ellerys or some of the old
historic scholars, disguised under the altered name of a female
descendant.

There probably is not an experienced instructor anywhere in our Northern
States who will not recognize at once the truth of this general
distinction.  But the reader who has never been a teacher will very
probably object, that some of our most illustrious public men have come
direct from the homespun-clad class of the people,--and he may, perhaps,
even find a noted scholar or two whose parents were masters of the
English alphabet, but of no other.

It is not fair to pit a few chosen families against the great multitude
of those who are continually working their way up into the intellectual
classes.  The results which are habitually reached by hereditary training
are occasionally brought about without it.  There are natural filters as
well as artificial ones; and though the great rivers are commonly more or
less turbid, if you will look long enough, you may find a spring that
sparkles as no water does which drips through your apparatus of sands and
sponges.  So there are families which refine themselves into intellectual
aptitude without having had much opportunity for intellectual
acquirements.  A series of felicitous crosses develops an improved strain
of blood, and reaches its maximum perfection at last in the large
uncombed youth who goes to college and startles the hereditary
class-leaders by striding past them all.  That is Nature's republicanism;
thank God for it, but do not let it make you illogical.  The race of the
hereditary scholar has exchanged a certain portion of its animal vigor
for its new instincts, and it is hard to lead men without a good deal of
animal vigor.  The scholar who comes by Nature's special grace from an
unworn stock of broad-chested sires and deep-bosomed mothers must always
overmatch an equal intelligence with a compromised and lowered vitality.
A man's breathing and digestive apparatus (one is tempted to add
muscular) are just as important to him on the floor of the Senate as his
thinking organs.  You broke down in your great speech, did you?  Yes,
your grandfather had an attack of dyspepsia in '82, after working too
hard on his famous Election Sermon.  All this does not touch the main
fact: our scholars come chiefly from a privileged order, just as our best
fruits come from well-known grafts, though now and then a seedling apple,
like the Northern Spy, or a seedling pear, like the Seckel, springs from
a nameless ancestry and grows to be the pride of all the gardens in the
land.

Let me introduce you to a young man who belongs to the Brahmin caste of
New England.




CHAPTER II.

THE STUDENT AND HIS CERTIFICATE.

Bernard C. Langdon, a young man attending Medical Lectures at the school
connected with one of our principal colleges, remained after the Lecture
one day and wished to speak with the Professor.  He was a student of
mark,--first favorite of his year, as they say of the Derby colts.  There
are in every class half a dozen bright faces to which the teacher
naturally, directs his discourse, and by the intermediation of whose
attention he seems to hold that of the mass of listeners.  Among these
some one is pretty sure to take the lead, by virtue of a personal
magnetism, or some peculiarity of expression, which places the face in
quick sympathetic relations with the lecturer.  This was a young man with
such a face; and I found,--for you have guessed that I was the
"Professor" above-mentioned,--that, when there was anything difficult to
be explained, or when I was bringing out some favorite illustration of a
nice point, (as, for instance; when I compared the cell-growth, by which
Nature builds up a plant or an animal, to the glassblower's similar mode
of beginning,--always with a hollow sphere, or vesicle, whatever he is
going to make,) I naturally looked in his face and gauged my success by
its expression.

It was a handsome face,--a little too pale, perhaps, and would have borne
something more of fulness without becoming heavy.  I put the organization
to which it belongs in Section B of Class 1 of my Anglo-American
Anthropology (unpublished).  The jaw in this section is but slightly
narrowed,--just enough to make the width of the forehead tell more
decidedly.  The moustache often grows vigorously, but the whiskers are
thin.  The skin is like that of Jacob, rather than like Esau's.  One
string of the animal nature has been taken away, but this gives only a
greater predominance to the intellectual chords. To see just how the
vital energy has been toned down, you must contrast one of this section
with a specimen of Section A of the same class,--say, for instance, one
of the old-fashioned, full-whiskered, red-faced, roaring, big Commodores
of the last generation, whom you remember, at least by their portraits,
in ruffled shirts, looking as hearty as butchers and as plucky as
bull-terriers, with their hair combed straight up from their foreheads,
which were not commonly very high or broad.  The special form of physical
life I have been describing gives you a right to expect more delicate
perceptions and a more reflective, nature than you commonly find in
shaggy-throated men, clad in heavy suits of muscles.

The student lingered in the lecture-room, looking all the time as if he
wanted to say something in private, and waiting for two or three others,
who were still hanging about, to be gone.

Something is wrong!--I said to myself, when I noticed his
expression.--Well, Mr.  Langdon,--I said to him, when we were alone,--can
I do anything for you to-day?

You can, Sir,--he said.--I am going to leave the class, for the present,
and keep school.

Why, that 's a pity, and you so near graduating!  You'd better stay and
finish this course and take your degree in the spring, rather than break
up your whole plan of study.

I can't help myself, Sir,--the young man answered.--There 's trouble at
home, and they cannot keep me here as they have done.  So I must look out
for myself for a while.  It's what I've done before, and am ready to do
again.  I came to ask you for a certificate of my fitness to teach a
common school, or a high school, if you think I am up to that.  Are you
willing to give it to me?

Willing?  Yes, to be sure,--but I don't want you to go.  Stay; we'll make
it easy for you.  There's a fund will do something for you, perhaps.
Then you can take both the annual prizes, if you like,--and claim them in
money, if you want that more than medals.

I have thought it all over,--he answered,--and have pretty much made up
my mind to go.

A perfectly gentlemanly young man, of courteous address and mild
utterance, but means at least as much as he says.  There are some people
whose rhetoric consists of a slight habitual under-statement. I often
tell Mrs. Professor that one of her "I think it's sos" is worth the
Bible-oath of all the rest of the household that they "know it's so."
When you find a person a little better than his word, a little more
liberal than his promise, a little more than borne out in his statement
by his facts, a little larger in deed than in speech, you recognize a
kind of eloquence in that person's utterance not laid down in Blair or
Campbell.

This was a proud fellow, self-trusting, sensitive, with
family-recollections that made him unwilling to accept the kind of aid
which many students would have thankfully welcomed.  I knew him too well
to urge him, after the few words which implied that he was determined to
go.  Besides, I have great confidence in young men who believe in
themselves, and are accustomed to rely on their own resources from an
early period.  When a resolute young fellow steps up to the great bully,
the World, and takes him boldly by the beard, he is often surprised to
find it come off in his hand, and that it was only tied on to scare away
timid adventurers.  I have seen young men more than once, who came to a
great city without a single friend, support themselves and pay for their
education, lay up money in a few years, grow rich enough to travel, and
establish themselves in life, without ever asking a dollar of any person
which they had not earned.  But these are exceptional cases.  There are
horse-tamers, born so,--as we all know; there are woman-tamers, who
bewitch the sex as the pied piper bedeviled the children of Hamelin; and
there are world-tamers, who can make any community, even a Yankee one,
get down and let them jump on its back as easily as Mr. Rarey saddled
Cruiser.

Whether Langdon was of this sort or not I could not say positively; but
he had spirit, and, as I have said, a family-pride which would not let
him be dependent.  The New England Brahmin caste often gets blended with
connections of political influence or commercial distinction.  It is a
charming thing for the scholar, when his fortune carries him in this way
into some of the "old families" who have fine old houses, and city-lots
that have risen in the market, and names written in all the stock-books
of all the dividend-paying companies.  His narrow study expands into a
stately library, his books are counted by thousands instead of hundreds,
and his favorites are dressed in gilded calf in place of plebeian
sheepskin or its pauper substitutes of cloth and paper.

The Reverend Jedediah Langdon, grandfather of our young gentleman, had
made an advantageous alliance of this kind.  Miss Dorothea Wentworth had
read one of his sermons which had been printed "by request," and became
deeply interested in the young author, whom she had never seen.  Out of
this circumstance grew a correspondence, an interview, a declaration, a
matrimonial alliance, and a family of half a dozen children.  Wentworth
Langdon, Esquire, was the oldest of these, and lived in the old
family-mansion.  Unfortunately, that principle of the diminution of
estates by division, to which I have referred, rendered it somewhat
difficult to maintain the establishment upon the fractional income which
the proprietor received from his share of the property.  Wentworth
Langdon, Esq., represented a certain intermediate condition of life not
at all infrequent in our old families.  He was the connecting link
between the generation which lived in ease, and even a kind of state,
upon its own resources, and the new brood, which must live mainly by its
wits or industry, and make itself rich, or shabbily subside into that
lower stratum known to social geologists by a deposit of Kidderminster
carpets and the peculiar aspect of the fossils constituting the family
furniture and wardrobe.  This slack-water period of a race, which comes
before the rapid ebb of its prosperity, is familiar to all who live in
cities.  There are no more quiet, inoffensive people than these children
of rich families, just above the necessity of active employment, yet not
in a condition to place their own children advantageously, if they happen
to have families. Many of them are content to live unmarried.  Some mend
their broken fortunes by prudent alliances, and some leave a numerous
progeny to pass into the obscurity from which their ancestors emerged; so
that you may see on handcarts and cobblers' stalls names which, a few
generations back, were upon parchments with broad seals, and tombstones
with armorial bearings.

In a large city, this class of citizens is familiar to us in the streets.
They are very courteous in their salutations; they have time enough to
bow and take their hats off,--which, of course, no businessman can afford
to do.  Their beavers are smoothly brushed, and their boots well
polished; all their appointments are tidy; they look the respectable
walking gentleman to perfection.  They are prone to habits,--they
frequent reading-rooms,--insurance-offices,--they walk the same streets
at the same hours,--so that one becomes familiar with their faces and
persons, as a part of the street-furniture.

There is one curious circumstance, that all city-people must have
noticed, which is often illustrated in our experience of the slack-water
gentry.  We shall know a certain person by his looks, familiarly, for
years, but never have learned his name.  About this person we shall have
accumulated no little circumstantial knowledge;--thus, his face, figure,
gait, his mode of dressing, of saluting, perhaps even of speaking, may be
familiar to us; yet who he is we know not.  In another department of our
consciousness, there is a very familiar name, which we have never found
the person to match. We have heard it so often, that it has idealized
itself, and become one of that multitude of permanent shapes which walk
the chambers of the brain in velvet slippers in the company of Falstaff
and Hamlet and General Washington and Mr. Pickwick.  Sometimes the person
dies, but the name lives on indefinitely.  But now and then it happens,
perhaps after years of this independent existence of the name and its
shadowy image in the brain, on the one part, and the person and all its
real attributes, as we see them daily, on the other, that some accident
reveals their relation, and we find the name we have carried so long in
our memory belongs to the person we have known so long as a
fellow-citizen.  Now the slack--water gentry are among the persons most
likely to be the subjects of this curious divorce of title and
reality,--for the reason, that, playing no important part in the
community, there is nothing to tie the floating name to the actual
individual, as is the case with the men who belong in any way to the
public, while yet their names have a certain historical currency, and we
cannot help meeting them, either in their haunts, or going to and from
them.

To this class belonged Wentworth Langdon, Esq.  He had been "dead-headed"
into the world some fifty years ago, and had sat with his hands in his
pockets staring at the show ever since.  I shall not tell you, for
reasons before hinted, the whole name of the place in which he lived.  I
will only point you in the right direction, by saying that there are
three towns lying in a line with each other, as you go "down East," each
of them with a Port in its name, and each of them having a peculiar
interest which gives it individuality, in addition to the Oriental
character they have in common.  I need not tell you that these towns are
Newburyport, Portsmouth, and Portland. The Oriental character they have
in common consists in their large, square, palatial mansions, with sunny
gardens round them.  The two first have seen better days.  They are in
perfect harmony with the condition of weakened, but not impoverished,
gentility.  Each of them is a "paradise of demi-fortunes."  Each of them
is of that intermediate size between a village and a city which any place
has outgrown when the presence of a well-dressed stranger walking up and
down the main street ceases to be a matter of public curiosity and
private speculation, as frequently happens, during the busier months of
the year, in considerable commercial centres like Salem.  They both have
grand old recollections to fall back upon,--times when they looked
forward to commercial greatness, and when the portly gentlemen in cocked
hats, who built their now decaying wharves and sent out their ships all
over the world, dreamed that their fast-growing port was to be the Tyre
or the Carthage of the rich British Colony.  Great houses, like that once
lived in by Lord Timothy Dexter, in Newburyport, remain as evidence of
the fortunes amassed in these places of old.  Other mansions--like the
Rockingham House in Portsmouth (look at the white horse's tail before you
mount the broad staircase)--show that there was not only wealth, but
style and state, in these quiet old towns during the last century.  It is
not with any thought of pity or depreciation that we speak of them as in
a certain sense decayed towns; they did not fulfil their early promise of
expansion, but they remain incomparably the most interesting places of
their size in any of the three northernmost New England States. They have
even now prosperity enough to keep them in good condition, and offer the
most attractive residences for quiet families, which, if they had been
English, would have lived in a palazzo at Genoa or Pisa, or some other
Continental Newburyport or Portsmouth.

As for the last of the three Ports, or Portland, it is getting too
prosperous to be as attractive as its less northerly neighbors. Meant for
a fine old town, to ripen like a Cheshire cheese within its walls of
ancient rind, burrowed by crooked alleys and mottled with venerable
mould, it seems likely to sacrifice its mellow future to a vulgar
material prosperity.  Still it remains invested with many of its old
charms, as yet, and will forfeit its place among this admirable trio only
when it gets a hotel with unequivocal marks of having been built and
organized in the present century.

--It was one of the old square palaces of the North, in which Bernard
Langdon, the son of Wentworth, was born.  If he had had the luck to be an
only child, he might have lived as his father had done, letting his
meagre competence smoulder on almost without consuming, like the fuel in
an air-tight stove.  But after Master Bernard came Miss Dorothea
Elizabeth Wentworth Langdon, and then Master William Pepperell Langdon,
and others, equally well named,--a string of them, looking, when they
stood in a row in prayer-time, as if they would fit a set of Pandean
pipes, of from three feet upward in dimensions. The door of the air-tight
stove has to be opened, under such circumstances, you may well suppose!
So it happened that our young man had been obliged, from an early period,
to do something to support himself, and found himself stopped short in
his studies by the inability of the good people at home to furnish him
the present means of support as a student.

You will understand now why the young man wanted me to give him a
certificate of his fitness to teach, and why I did not choose to urge him
to accept the aid which a meek country-boy from a family without
ante-Revolutionary recollections would have thankfully received.  Go he
must,--that was plain enough.  He would not be content otherwise. He was
not, however, to give up his studies; and as it is customary to allow
half-time to students engaged in school-keeping,--that is, to count a
year, so employed, if the student also keep on with his professional
studies, as equal to six months of the three years he is expected to be
under an instructor before applying for his degree,--he would not
necessarily lose more than a few months of time.  He had a small library
of professional books, which he could take with him.

So he left my teaching and that of my estimable colleagues, carrying with
him my certificate, that Mr. Bernard C. Langdon was a young gentleman of
excellent moral character, of high intelligence and good education, and
that his services would be of great value in any school, academy, or
other institution, where young persons of-either sex were to be
instructed.

I confess, that expression, "either sex," ran a little thick, as I may
say, from my pen.  For, although the young man bore a very fair
character, and there was no special cause for doubting his discretion, I
considered him altogether too good-looking, in the first place, to be let
loose in a roomful of young girls.  I didn't want him to fall in love
just then--and if half a dozen girls fell in love with him, as they most
assuredly would, if brought into too near relations with him, why, there
was no telling what gratitude and natural sensibility might bring about.

Certificates are, for the most part, like ostrich-eggs; the giver never
knows what is hatched out of them.  But once in a thousand times they act
as curses are said to,--come home to roost.  Give them often enough,
until it gets to be a mechanical business, and, some day or other, you
will get caught warranting somebody's ice not to melt in any climate, or
somebody's razors to be safe in the hands of the youngest children.

I had an uneasy feeling, after giving this certificate.  It might be all
right enough; but if it happened to end badly, I should always reproach
myself.  There was a chance, certainly, that it would lead him or others
into danger or wretchedness.  Any one who looked at this young man could
not fail to see that he was capable of fascinating and being fascinated.
Those large, dark eyes of his would sink into the white soul of a young
girl as the black cloth sunk into the snow in Franklin's famous
experiment.  Or, on the other hand, if the rays of a passionate nature
should ever be concentrated on them, they would be absorbed into the very
depths of his nature, and then his blood would turn to flame and burn his
life out of him, until his cheeks grew as white as the ashes that cover a
burning coal.

I wish I had not said either sex in my certificate.  An academy for young
gentlemen, now; that sounds cool and unimaginative.  A boys' school, that
would be a very good place for him;--some of them are pretty rough, but
there is nerve enough in that old Wentworth strain of blood; he can give
any country fellow, of the common stock, twenty pounds, and hit him out
of time in ten minutes.  But to send such a young fellow as that out a
girl's-nesting! to give this falcon a free pass into all the dove-cotes!
I was a fool,--that's all.

I brooded over the mischief which might come out of these two words until
it seemed to me that they were charged with destiny.  I could hardly
sleep for thinking what a train I might have been laying, which might
take a spark any day, and blow up nobody knows whose peace or prospects.
What I dreaded most was one of those miserable matrimonial misalliances
where a young fellow who does not know himself as yet flings his
magnificent future into the checked apron-lap of some fresh-faced,
half-bred country-girl, no more fit to be mated with him than her
father's horse to go in double harness with Flora Temple.  To think of
the eagle's wings, being clipped so that he shall never lift himself over
the farm-yard fence!  Such things happen, and always must,--because, as
one of us said awhile ago, a man always loves, a woman, and a woman a
man, unless some good reason exists to the contrary.  You think yourself
a very fastidious young man, my friend; but there are probably at least
five-thousand young women in these United States, any one of whom you
would certainly marry, if you were thrown much into her company, and
nobody more attractive were near, and she had no objection.  And you, my
dear young lady, justly pride yourself on your discerning delicacy; but
if I should say that there are twenty thousand young men, any one of
whom, if he offered his hand and heart under favorable circumstances, you
would

          "First endure, then pity, then embrace,"

I should be much more imprudent than I mean to be, and you would, no
doubt, throw down a story in which I hope to interest you.

I had settled it in my mind that this young fellow had a career marked
out for him.  He should begin in the natural way, by taking care of poor
patients in one of the public charities, and work his way up to a better
kind of practice,--better, that is, in the vulgar, worldly sense.  The
great and good Boerhaave used to say, as I remember very well, that the
poor were his best patients; for God was their paymaster.  But everybody
is not as patient as Boerhaave, nor as deserving; so that the rich,
though not, perhaps, the best patients, are good enough for common
practitioners.  I suppose Boerhaave put up with them when he could not
get poor ones, as he left his daughter two millions of florins when he
died.

Now if this young man once got into the wide streets, he would sweep them
clear of his rivals of the same standing; and as I was getting
indifferent to business, and old Dr. Kilham was growing careless, and had
once or twice prescribed morphine when he meant quinine, there would soon
be an opening into the Doctor's Paradise,--the streets with only one side
to them.  Then I would have him strike a bold stroke,--set up a nice
little coach, and be driven round like a first-class London doctor,
instead of coasting about in a shabby one-horse concern and casting
anchor opposite his patients' doors like a Cape Ann fishing-smack.  By
the time he was thirty, he would have knocked the social pawns out of his
way, and be ready to challenge a wife from the row of great pieces in the
background.  I would not have a man marry above his level, so as to
become the appendage of a powerful family-connection; but I would not
have him marry until he knew his level,--that is, again, looking at the
matter in a purely worldly point of view, and not taking the sentiments
at all into consideration.  But remember, that a young man, using large
endowments wisely and fortunately, may put himself on a level with the
highest in the land in ten brilliant years of spirited, unflagging labor.
And to stand at the very top of your calling in a great city is something
in itself,--that is, if you like money, and influence, and a seat on the
platform at public lectures, and gratuitous tickets to all sorts of
places where you don't want to go, and, what is a good deal better than
any of these things, a sense of power, limited, it may be, but absolute
in its range, so that all the Caesars and Napoleons would have to stand
aside, if they came between you and the exercise of your special
vocation.

That is what I thought this young fellow might have come to; and now I
have let him go off into the country with my certificate, that he is fit
to teach in a school for either sex!  Ten to one he will run like a moth
into a candle, right into one of those girls'-nests, and get tangled up
in some sentimental folly or other, and there will be the end of him.
Oh, yes! country doctor,--half a dollar a visit,--drive, drive, drive
all day,--get up at night and harness your own horse,--drive again ten
miles in a snow-storm, shake powders out of two phials, (pulv.
glycyrrhiz., pulv.  gum.  acac.  as partes equates,)--drive back again,
if you don't happen to get stuck in a drift, no home, no peace, no
continuous meals, no unbroken sleep, no Sunday, no holiday, no social
intercourse, but one eternal jog, jog, jog, in a sulky, until you feel
like the mummy of an Indian who had been buried in the sitting posture,
and was dug up a hundred years afterwards!  Why did n't I warn him about
love and all that nonsense? Why didn't I tell him he had nothing to do
with it, yet awhile?  Why did n't I hold up to him those awful examples I
could have cited, where poor young fellows who could just keep themselves
afloat have hung a matrimonial millstone round their necks, taking it for
a life-preserver?  All this of two words in a certificate!




CHAPTER III.

MR. BERNARD TRIES HIS HAND.

Whether the Student advertised for a school, or whether he fell in with
the advertisement of a school-committee, is not certain.  At any rate, it
was not long before he found himself the head of a large district, or, as
it was called by the inhabitants, "deestric" school, in the flourishing
inland village of Pequawkett, or, as it is commonly spelt, Pigwacket
Centre.  The natives of this place would be surprised, if they should
hear that any of the readers of a work published in Boston were
unacquainted with so remarkable a locality. As, however, some copies of
it may be read at a distance from this distinguished metropolis, it may
be well to give a few particulars respecting the place, taken from the
Universal Gazetteer.

"PIGWACKET, sometimes spelt Pequawkett.  A post-village and township in
_________ Co., State of _________,situated in a fine agricultural region,
2 thriving villages, Pigwacket Centre and Smithville, 3 churches, several
school houses, and many handsome private residences.  Mink River runs
through the town, navigable for small boats after heavy rains.  Muddy
Pond at N. E.  section, well stocked with horn pouts, eels, and shiners.
Products, beef, pork, butter, cheese.  Manufactures, shoe-pegs,
clothes-pins, and tin-ware.  Pop. 1373."

The reader may think there is nothing very remarkable implied in this
description.  If, however he had read the town-history, by the Rev. Jabez
Grubb, he would have learned, that, like the celebrated Little
Pedlington, it was distinguished by many very remarkable advantages.
Thus:

"The situation of Pigwacket is eminently beautiful, looking down the
lovely valley of Mink River, a tributary of the Musquash.  The air is
salubrious, and many of the inhabitants have attained great age, several
having passed the allotted period of 'three-score years and ten' before
succumbing to any of the various 'ills that flesh is heir to.' Widow
Comfort Leevins died in 1836 AEt.  LXXXVII.  years. Venus, an African,
died in 1841, supposed to be C. years old.  The people are distinguished
for intelligence, as has been frequently remarked by eminent
lyceum-lecturers, who have invariably spoken in the highest terms of a
Pigwacket audience.  There is a public library, containing nearly a
hundred volumes, free to all subscribers.  The preached word is well
attended, there is a flourishing temperance society, and the schools are
excellent.  It is a residence admirably adapted to refined families who
relish the beauties of Nature and the charms of society.  The Honorable
John Smith, formerly a member of the State Senate, was a native of this
town."

That is the way they all talk.  After all, it is probably pretty much
like other inland New England towns in point of "salubrity,"--that is,
gives people their choice of dysentery or fever every autumn, with a
season-ticket for consumption, good all the year round.  And so of the
other pretences.  "Pigwacket audience," forsooth!  Was there ever an
audience anywhere, though there wasn't a pair of eyes in it brighter than
pickled oysters, that did n't think it was "distinguished for
intelligence"?--"The preached word"!  That means the Rev. Jabez Grubb's
sermons.  "Temperance society"!  "Excellent schools"!  Ah, that is just
what we were talking about.

The truth was, that District No. 1, Pigwacket Centre, had had a good deal
of trouble of late with its schoolmasters.  The committee had done their
best, but there were a number of well-grown and pretty rough young
fellows who had got the upper-hand of the masters, and meant to keep it.
Two dynasties had fallen before the uprising of this fierce democracy.
This was a thing that used to be not very uncommon; but in so
"intelligent" a community as that of Pigwacket Centre, in an era of
public libraries and lyceum-lectures, it was portentous and alarming.

The rebellion began under the ferule of Master Weeks, a slender youth
from a country college, underfed, thin-blooded, sloping-shouldered,
knock-kneed, straight-haired, weak-bearded, pale-eyed, wide-pupilled,
half-colored; a common type enough in in-door races, not rich enough to
pick and choose in their alliances.  Nature kills off a good many of this
sort in the first teething-time, a few in later childhood, a good many
again in early adolescence; but every now and then one runs the gauntlet
of her various diseases, or rather forms of one disease, and grows up, as
Master Weeks had done.

It was a very foolish thing for him to try to inflict personal punishment
on such a lusty young fellow as Abner Briggs, Junior, one of the "hardest
customers" in the way of a rough-and-tumble fight that there were
anywhere round.  No doubt he had been insolent, but it would have been
better to overlook it.  It pains me to report the events which took place
when the master made his rash attempt to maintain his authority.  Abner
Briggs, Junior, was a great, hulking fellow, who had been bred to
butchering, but urged by his parents to attend school, in order to learn
the elegant accomplishments of reading and writing, in which he was sadly
deficient.  He was in the habit of talking and laughing pretty loud in
school-hours, of throwing wads of paper reduced to a pulp by a natural
and easy process, of occasional insolence and general negligence.  One of
the soft, but unpleasant missiles just alluded to flew by the master's
head one morning, and flattened itself against the wall, where it adhered
in the form of a convex mass in alto rilievo.  The master looked round
and saw the young butcher's arm in an attitude which pointed to it
unequivocally as the source from which the projectile had taken its
flight.

Master Weeks turned pale.  He must "lick" Abner Briggs, Junior, or
abdicate.  So he determined to lick Abner Briggs, Junior.

"Come here, Sir!" he said; "you have insulted me and outraged the decency
of the schoolroom often enough!  Hold out your hand!"

The young fellow grinned and held it out.  The master struck at it with
his black ruler, with a will in the blow and a snapping of the eyes, as
much as to say that he meant to make him smart this time. The young
fellow pulled his hand back as the ruler came down, and the master hit
himself a vicious blow with it on the right knee.  There are things no
man can stand.  The master caught the refractory youth by the collar and
began shaking him, or rather shaking himself against him.

"Le' go o' that are coat, naow," said the fellow, "or I 'll make ye! 'T
'll take tew on yet' handle me, I tell ye, 'n' then ye caant dew
it!"--and the young pupil returned the master's attention by catching
hold of his collar.

When it comes to that, the best man, not exactly in the moral sense, but
rather in the material, and more especially the muscular point of view,
is very apt to have the best of it, irrespectively of the merits of the
case.  So it happened now.  The unfortunate schoolmaster found himself
taking the measure of the sanded floor, amidst the general uproar of the
school.  From that moment his ferule was broken, and the school-committee
very soon had a vacancy to fill.

Master Pigeon, the successor of Master Weeks, was of better stature, but
loosely put together, and slender-limbed.  A dreadfully nervous kind of
man he was, walked on tiptoe, started at sudden noises, was distressed
when he heard a whisper, had a quick, suspicious look, and was always
saying, "Hush?" and putting his hands to his ears.  The boys were not
long in finding out this nervous weakness, of course. In less than a week
a regular system of torments was inaugurated, full of the most diabolical
malice and ingenuity.  The exercises of the conspirators varied from day
to day, but consisted mainly of foot-scraping, solos on the slate-pencil,
(making it screech on the slate,) falling of heavy books, attacks of
coughing, banging of desk-lids, boot-creaking, with sounds as of drawing
a cork from time to time, followed by suppressed chuckles.

Master Pigeon grew worse and worse under these inflictions.  The rascally
boys always had an excuse for any one trick they were caught at.  "Could
n' help coughin', Sir."  "Slipped out o' m' han', Sir." "Did n' go to,
Sir."  "Did n' dew't o' purpose, Sir."  And so on,--always the best of
reasons for the most outrageous of behavior.  The master weighed himself
at the grocer's on a platform balance, some ten days after he began
keeping the school.  At the end of a week he weighed himself again.  He
had lost two pounds.  At the end of another week he had lost five.  He
made a little calculation, based on these data, from which he learned
that in a certain number of months, going on at this rate, he should come
to weigh precisely nothing at all; and as this was a sum in subtraction
he did not care to work out in practice, Master Pigeon took to himself
wings and left the school-committee in possession of a letter of
resignation and a vacant place to fill once more.

This was the school to which Mr. Bernard Langdon found himself appointed
as master.  He accepted the place conditionally, with the understanding
that he should leave it at the end of a month, if he were tired of it.

The advent of Master Langdon to Pigwacket Centre created a much more
lively sensation than had attended that of either of his predecessors.
Looks go a good way all the world over, and though there were several
good-looking people in the place, and Major Bush was what the natives of
the town called a "hahnsome mahn," that is, big, fat, and red, yet the
sight of a really elegant young fellow, with the natural air which grows
up with carefully-bred young persons, was a novelty.  The Brahmin blood
which came from his grandfather as well as from his mother, a direct
descendant of the old Flynt family, well known by the famous tutor, Henry
Flynt, (see Cat.  Harv.  Anno 1693,) had been enlivened and enriched by
that of the Wentworths, which had had a good deal of ripe old Madeira and
other generous elements mingled with it, so that it ran to gout sometimes
in the old folks and to high spirit, warm complexion, and curly hair in
some of the younger ones.  The soft curling hair Mr. Bernard had
inherited,--something, perhaps, of the high spirit; but that we shall
have a chance of finding out by and by.  But the long sermons and the
frugal board of his Brahmin ancestry, with his own habits of study, had
told upon his color, which was subdued to something more of delicacy than
one would care to see in a young fellow with rough work before him.
This, however, made him look more interesting, or, as the young ladies at
Major Bush's said, "interestin'."

When Mr. Bernard showed himself at meeting, on the first Sunday after his
arrival, it may be supposed that a good many eyes were turned upon the
young schoolmaster.  There was something heroic in his coming forward so
readily to take a place which called for a strong hand, and a prompt,
steady will to guide it.  In fact, his position was that of a military
chieftain on the eve of a battle.  Everybody knew everything in Pigwacket
Centre; and it was an understood thing that the young rebels meant to put
down the new master, if they could.  It was natural that the two
prettiest girls in the village, called in the local dialect, as nearly as
our limited alphabet will represent it, Alminy Cutterr, and Arvilly
Braowne, should feel and express an interest in the good-looking
stranger, and that, when their flattering comments were repeated in the
hearing of their indigenous admirers, among whom were some of the older
"boys" of the school, it should not add to the amiable dispositions of
the turbulent youth.

Monday came, and the new schoolmaster was in his chair at the upper end
of the schoolhouse, on the raised platform.  The rustics looked at his
handsome face, thoughtful, peaceful, pleasant, cheerful, but sharply cut
round the lips and proudly lighted about the eyes.  The ringleader of the
mischief-makers, the young butcher who has before figured in this
narrative, looked at him stealthily, whenever he got a chance to study
him unobserved; for the truth was, he felt uncomfortable, whenever he
found the large, dark eyes fixed on his own little, sharp, deep-set, gray
ones.  But he managed to study him pretty well,--first his face, then his
neck and shoulders, the set of his arms, the narrowing at the loins, the
make of his legs, and the way he moved.  In short, he examined him as he
would have examined a steer, to see what he could do and how he would cut
up.  If he could only have gone to him and felt of his muscles, he would
have been entirely satisfied.  He was not a very wise youth, but he did
know well enough, that, though big arms and legs are very good things,
there is something besides size that goes to make a man; and he had heard
stories of a fighting-man, called "The Spider," from his attenuated
proportions, who was yet a terrible hitter in the ring, and had whipped
many a big-limbed fellow, in and out of the roped arena.

Nothing could be smoother than the way in which everything went on for
the first day or two.  The new master was so kind and courteous, he
seemed to take everything in such a natural, easy way, that there was no
chance to pick a quarrel with him.  He in the mean time thought it best
to watch the boys and young men for a day or two with as little show of
authority as possible.  It was easy enough to see that he would have
occasion for it before long.

The schoolhouse was a grim, old, red, one-story building, perched on a
bare rock at the top of a hill,--partly because this was a conspicuous
site for the temple of learning, and partly because land is cheap where
there is no chance even for rye or buckwheat, and the very sheep find
nothing to nibble.  About the little porch were carved initials and
dates, at various heights, from the stature of nine to that of eighteen.
Inside were old unpainted desks,--unpainted, but browned with the umber
of human contact,--and hacked by innumerable jack-knives.  It was long
since the walls had been whitewashed, as might be conjectured by the
various traces left upon them, wherever idle hands or sleepy heads could
reach them.  A curious appearance was noticeable on various higher parts
of the wall: namely, a wart-like eruption, as one would be tempted to
call it, being in reality a crop of the soft missiles before mentioned,
which, adhering in considerable numbers, and hardening after the usual
fashion of papier-mache, formed at last permanent ornaments of the
edifice.

The young master's quick eye soon noticed that a particular part of the
wall was most favored with these ornamental appendages.  Their position
pointed sufficiently clearly to the part of the room they came from.  In
fact, there was a nest of young mutineers just there, which must be
broken up by a coup d'etat.  This was easily effected by redistributing
the seats and arranging the scholars according to classes, so that a
mischievous fellow, charged full of the rebellious imponderable, should
find himself between two non-conductors, in the shape of small boys of
studious habits.  It was managed quietly enough, in such a plausible sort
of way that its motive was not thought of.  But its effects were soon
felt; and then began a system of correspondence by signs, and the
throwing of little scrawls done up in pellets, and announced by
preliminary a'h'ms! to call the attention of the distant youth addressed.
Some of these were incendiary documents, devoting the schoolmaster to the
lower divinities, as "a stuck-up dandy," as "a purse-proud aristocrat,"
as "a sight too big for his, etc.," and holding him up in a variety of
equally forcible phrases to the indignation of the youthful community of
School District No. 1, Pigwacket Centre.

Presently the draughtsman of the school set a caricature in circulation,
labelled, to prevent mistakes, with the schoolmaster's name.  An immense
bell-crowned hat, and a long, pointed, swallow-tailed coat showed that
the artist had in his mind the conventional dandy, as shown in prints of
thirty or forty years ago, rather than any actual human aspect of the
time.  But it was passed round among the boys and made its laugh, helping
of course to undermine the master's authority, as "Punch" or the
"Charivari" takes the dignity out of an obnoxious minister.  One morning,
on going to the schoolroom, Master Langdon found an enlarged copy of this
sketch, with its label, pinned on the door.  He took it down, smiled a
little, put it into his pocket, and entered the schoolroom.  An insidious
silence prevailed, which looked as if some plot were brewing.  The boys
were ripe for mischief, but afraid.  They had really no fault to find
with the master, except that he was dressed like a gentleman, which a
certain class of fellows always consider a personal insult to themselves.
But the older ones were evidently plotting, and more than once the
warning a'h'm! was heard, and a dirty little scrap of paper rolled into a
wad shot from one seat to another.  One of these happened to strike the
stove-funnel, and lodged on the master's desk.  He was cool enough not to
seem to notice it.  He secured it, however, and found an opportunity to
look at it, without being observed by the boys.  It required no immediate
notice.

He who should have enjoyed the privilege of looking upon Mr. Bernard
Langdon the next morning, when his toilet was about half finished, would
have had a very pleasant gratuitous exhibition.  First he buckled the
strap of his trousers pretty tightly.  Then he took up a pair of heavy
dumb-bells, and swung them for a few minutes; then two great "Indian
clubs," with which he enacted all sorts of impossible-looking feats.  His
limbs were not very large, nor his shoulders remarkably broad; but if you
knew as much of the muscles as all persons who look at statues and
pictures with a critical eye ought to have learned,--if you knew the
trapezius, lying diamond-shaped over the back and shoulders like a monk's
cowl,--or the deltoid, which caps the shoulder like an epaulette,--or the
triceps, which furnishes the calf of the upper arm,--or the hard-knotted
biceps,--any of the great sculptural landmarks, in fact,--you would have
said there was a pretty show of them, beneath the white satiny skin of
Mr. Bernard Langdon.  And if you had seen him, when he had laid down the
Indian clubs, catch hold of a leather strap that hung from the beam of
the old-fashioned ceiling,--and lift and lower himself over and over
again by his left hand alone, you might have thought it a very simple and
easy thing to do, until you tried to do it yourself.  Mr. Bernard looked
at himself with the eye of an expert.  "Pretty well!" he said;--"not so
much fallen off as I expected."  Then he set up his bolster in a very
knowing sort of way, and delivered two or three blows straight as rulers
and swift as winks.  "That will do," he said.  Then, as if determined to
make a certainty of his condition, he took a dynamometer from one of the
drawers in his old veneered bureau.  First he squeezed it with his two
hands.  Then he placed it on the floor and lifted, steadily, strongly.
The springs creaked and cracked; the index swept with a great stride far
up into the high figures of the scale; it was a good lift.  He was
satisfied.  He sat down on the edge of his bed and looked at his
cleanly-shaped arms. "If I strike one of those boobies, I am afraid I
shall spoil him," he said.  Yet this young man, when weighed with his
class at the college, could barely turn one hundred and forty-two pounds
in the scale,--not a heavy weight, surely; but some of the middle
weights, as the present English champion, for instance, seem to be of a
far finer quality of muscle than the bulkier fellows.

The master took his breakfast with a good appetite that morning, but was
perhaps rather more quiet than usual.  After breakfast he went up-stairs
and put, on a light loose frock, instead of that which he commonly wore,
which was a close-fitting and rather stylish one.  On his way to school
he met Alminy Cutterr, who happened to be walking in the other direction.
"Good-morning, Miss Cutter," he said; for she and another young lady had
been introduced to him, on a former occasion, in the usual phrase of
polite society in presenting ladies to gentlemen,--"Mr. Langdon, let me
make y' acquainted with Miss Cutterr;--let me make y' acquainted with
Miss Braowne."  So he said, "Good-morning"; to which she replied,
"Good-mornin', Mr. Langdon. Haow's your haalth?"  The answer to this
question ought naturally to have been the end of the talk; but Alminy
Cutterr lingered and looked as if she had something more on her mind.

A young fellow does not require a great experience to read a simple
country-girl's face as if it were a sign-board.  Alminy was a good soul,
with red cheeks and bright eyes, kind-hearted as she could be, and it was
out of the question for her to hide her thoughts or feelings like a fine
lady.  Her bright eyes were moist and her red cheeks paler than their
wont, as she said, with her lips quivering, "Oh, Mr. Langdon, them boys
'll be the death of ye, if ye don't take caar!"

"Why, what's the matter, my dear?"  said Mr. Bernard.--Don't think there
was anything very odd in that "my dear," at the second interview with a
village belle;--some of these woman-tamers call a girl "My dear," after
five minutes' acquaintance, and it sounds all right as they say it.  But
you had better not try it at a venture.

It sounded all right to Alminy, as Mr. Bernard said it.--"I 'll tell ye
what's the mahtterr," she said, in a frightened voice.  "Ahbner 's go'n'
to car' his dog, 'n' he'll set him on ye'z sure 'z y' 'r' alive.  'T's
the same cretur that haaf eat up Eben Squires's little Jo, a year come
nex' Faast day."

Now this last statement was undoubtedly overcolored; as little Jo Squires
was running about the village,--with an ugly scar on his arm, it is true,
where the beast had caught him with his teeth, on the occasion of the
child's taking liberties with him, as he had been accustomed to do with a
good-tempered Newfoundland dog, who seemed to like being pulled and
hauled round by children.  After this the creature was commonly muzzled,
and, as he was fed on raw meat chiefly, was always ready for a fight,
which he was occasionally indulged in, when anything stout enough to
match him could be found in any of the neighboring villages.

Tiger, or, more briefly, Tige, the property of Abner Briggs, Junior,
belonged to a species not distinctly named in scientific books, but well
known to our country-folks under the name "Yallah dog."  They do not use
this expression as they would say black dog or white dog, but with almost
as definite a meaning as when they speak of a terrier or a spaniel.  A
"yallah dog" is a large canine brute, of a dingy old-flannel color, of no
particular breed except his own, who hangs round a tavern or a butcher's
shop, or trots alongside of a team, looking as if he were disgusted with
the world, and the world with him.  Our inland population, while they
tolerate him, speak of him with contempt.  Old ______, of Meredith
Bridge, used to twit the sun for not shining on cloudy days, swearing,
that, if he hung up his "yallah dog," he would make a better show of
daylight.  A country fellow, abusing a horse of his neighbor's, vowed,
that, "if he had such a hoss, he'd swap him for a `yallah dog,'--and then
shoot the dog."

Tige was an ill-conditioned brute by nature, and art had not improved him
by cropping his ears and tail and investing him with a spiked collar.  He
bore on his person, also, various not ornamental scars, marks of old
battles; for Tige had fight in him, as was said before, and as might be
guessed by a certain bluntness about the muzzle, with a projection of the
lower jaw, which looked as if there might be a bull-dog stripe among the
numerous bar-sinisters of his lineage.

It was hardly fair, however, to leave Alminy Cutterr waiting while this
piece of natural history was telling.--As she spoke of little Jo, who had
been "haaf eat up" by Tige, she could not contain her sympathies, and
began to cry.

"Why, my dear little soul," said Mr. Bernard, "what are you worried
about?  I used to play with a bear when I was a boy; and the bear used to
hug me, and I used to kiss him,--so!"

It was too bad of Mr. Bernard, only the second time he had seen Alminy;
but her kind feelings had touched him, and that seemed the most natural
way of expressing his gratitude.  Ahniny looked round to see if anybody
was near; she saw nobody, so of course it would do no good to "holler."
She saw nobody; but a stout young fellow, leading a yellow dog, muzzled,
saw her through a crack in a picket fence, not a great way off the road.
Many a year he had been "hangin' 'raoun'" Alminy, and never did he see
any encouraging look, or hear any "Behave, naow!" or "Come, naow, a'n't
ye 'shamed?" or other forbidding phrase of acquiescence, such as village
belles under stand as well as ever did the nymph who fled to the willows
in the eclogue we all remember.

No wonder he was furious, when he saw the school master, who had never
seen the girl until within a week, touching with his lips those rosy
cheeks which he had never dared to approach.  But that was all; it was a
sudden impulse; and the master turned away from the young girl, laughing,
and telling her not to fret herself about him,--he would take care of
himself.

So Master Langdon walked on toward his school-house, not displeased,
perhaps, with his little adventure, nor immensely elated by it; for he
was one of the natural class of the sex-subduers, and had had many a
smile without asking, which had been denied to the feeble youth who try
to win favor by pleading their passion in rhyme, and even to the more
formidable approaches of young officers in volunteer companies,
considered by many to be quite irresistible to the fair who have once
beheld them from their windows in the epaulettes and plumes and sashes of
the "Pigwacket Invincibles," or the "Hackmatack Rangers."

Master Langdon took his seat and began the exercises of his school. The
smaller boys recited their lessons well enough, but some of the larger
ones were negligent and surly.  He noticed one or two of them looking
toward the door, as if expecting somebody or something in that direction.
At half past nine o'clock, Abner Briggs, Junior, who had not yet shown
himself, made his appearance.  He was followed by his "yallah dog,"
without his muzzle, who squatted down very grimly near the door, and gave
a wolfish look round the room, as if he were considering which was the
plumpest boy to begin with.  The young butcher, meanwhile, went to his
seat, looking somewhat flushed, except round the lips, which were hardly
as red as common, and set pretty sharply.

"Put out that dog, Abner Briggs!"--The master spoke as the captain speaks
to the helmsman, when there are rocks foaming at the lips, right under
his lee.

Abner Briggs answered as the helmsman answers, when he knows he has a
mutinous crew round him that mean to run the ship on the reef, and is one
of the mutineers himself.  "Put him aout y'rself, 'f ye a'n't afeard on
him!"

The master stepped into the aisle: The great cur showed his teeth,--and
the devilish instincts of his old wolf-ancestry looked out of his eyes,
and flashed from his sharp tusks, and yawned in his wide mouth and deep
red gullet.

The movements of animals are so much quicker than those of human beings
commonly are, that they avoid blows as easily as one of us steps out of
the way of an ox-cart.  It must be a very stupid dog that lets himself be
run over by a fast driver in his gig; he can jump out of the wheel's way
after the tire has already touched him. So, while one is lifting a stick
to strike or drawing back his foot to kick, the beast makes his spring,
and the blow or the kick comes too late.

It was not so this time.  The master was a fencer, and something of a
boxer; he had played at singlestick, and was used to watching an
adversary's eye and coming down on him without any of those premonitory
symptoms by which unpractised persons show long beforehand what mischief
they meditate.

"Out with you!" he said, fiercely,--and explained what he meant by a
sudden flash of his foot that clashed the yellow dog's white teeth
together like the springing of a bear-trap.  The cur knew he had found
his master at the first word and glance, as low animals on four legs, or
a smaller number, always do; and the blow took him so by surprise, that
it curled him up in an instant, and he went bundling out of the open
schoolhouse-door with a most pitiable yelp, and his stump of a tail shut
down as close as his owner ever shut the short, stubbed blade of his
jack-knife.

It was time for the other cur to find who his master.

"Follow your dog, Abner Briggs!" said Master Langdon.

The stout butcher-youth looked round, but the rebels were all cowed and
sat still.

"I'll go when I'm ready," he said,--"'n' I guess I won't go afore I'm
ready."

"You're ready now," said Master Langdon, turning up his cuffs so that the
little boys noticed the yellow gleam of a pair of gold sleeve-buttons,
once worn by Colonel Percy Wentworth, famous in the Old French War.

Abner Briggs, Junior, did not apparently think he was ready, at any rate;
for he rose up in his place, and stood with clenched fists, defiant, as
the master strode towards him.  The master knew the fellow was really
frightened, for all his looks, and that he must have no time to rally.
So he caught him suddenly by the collar, and, with one great pull, had
him out over his desk and on the open floor. He gave him a sharp fling
backwards and stood looking at him.

The rough-and-tumble fighters all clinch, as everybody knows; and Abner
Briggs, Junior, was one of that kind.  He remembered how he had floored
Master Weeks, and he had just "spunk" enough left in him to try to repeat
his former successful experiment an the new master.  He sprang at him,
open-handed, to clutch him.  So the master had to strike,--once, but very
hard, and just in the place to tell.  No doubt, the authority that doth
hedge a schoolmaster added to the effect of the blow; but the blow was
itself a neat one, and did not require to be repeated.

"Now go home," said the master, "and don't let me see you or your dog
here again."  And he turned his cuffs down over the gold sleeve-buttons.

This finished the great Pigwacket Centre School rebellion.  What could be
done with a master who was so pleasant as long as the boys behaved
decently, and such a terrible fellow when he got "riled," as they called
it?  In a week's time everything was reduced to order, and the
school-committee were delighted.  The master, however, had received a
proposition so much more agreeable and advantageous, that he informed the
committee he should leave at the end of his month, having in his eye a
sensible and energetic young college-graduate who would be willing and
fully competent to take his place.

So, at the expiration of the appointed time, Bernard Langdon, late master
of the School District No. 1, Pigwacket Centre, took his departure from
that place for another locality, whither we shall follow him, carrying
with him the regrets of the committee, of most of the scholars, and of
several young ladies; also two locks of hair, sent unbeknown to payrents,
one dark and one warmish auburn, inscribed with the respective initials
of Alminy Cutterr and Arvilly Braowne.




CHAPTER IV

THE MOTH FLIES INTO THE CANDLE.

The invitation which Mr. Bernard Langdon had accepted came from the Board
of Trustees of the "Apollinean Female Institute," a school for the
education of young ladies, situated in the flourishing town of Rockland.
This was an establishment on a considerable scale, in which a hundred
scholars or thereabouts were taught the ordinary English branches,
several of the modern languages, something of Latin, if desired, with a
little natural philosophy, metaphysics, and rhetoric, to finish off with
in the last year, and music at any time when they would pay for it.  At
the close of their career in the Institute, they were submitted to a
grand public examination, and received diplomas tied in blue ribbons,
which proclaimed them with a great flourish of capitals to be graduates
of the Apollinean Female Institute.

Rockland was a town of no inconsiderable pretensions.  It was ennobled by
lying at the foot of a mountain,--called by the working-folks of the
place "the Maounting,"--which sufficiently showed that it was the
principal high land of the district in which it was situated.  It lay to
the south of this, and basked in the sunshine as Italy stretches herself
before the Alps.  To pass from the town of Tamarack on the north of the
mountain to Rockland on the south was like crossing from Coire to
Chiavenna.

There is nothing gives glory and grandeur and romance and mystery to a
place like the impending presence of a high mountain.  Our beautiful
Northampton with its fair meadows and noble stream is lovely enough, but
owes its surpassing attraction to those twin summits which brood over it
like living presences, looking down into its streets as if they were its
tutelary divinities, dressing and undressing their green shrines, robing
themselves in jubilant sunshine or in sorrowing clouds, and doing penance
in the snowy shroud of winter, as if they had living hearts under their
rocky ribs and changed their mood like the children of the soil at their
feet, who grow up under their almost parental smiles and frowns.  Happy
is the child whose first dreams of heaven are blended with the evening
glories of Mount Holyoke, when the sun is firing its treetops, and
gilding the white walls that mark its one human dwelling!  If the other
and the wilder of the two summits has a scowl of terror in its
overhanging brows, yet is it a pleasing fear to look upon its savage
solitudes through the barred nursery-windows in the heart of the sweet,
companionable village.--And how the mountains love their children!  The
sea is of a facile virtue, and will run to kiss the first comer in any
port he visits; but the chaste mountains sit apart, and show their faces
only in the midst of their own families.

The Mountain which kept watch to the north of Rockland lay waste and
almost inviolate through much of its domain.  The catamount still glared
from the branches of its old hemlocks on the lesser beasts that strayed
beneath him.  It was not long since a wolf had wandered down, famished in
the winter's dearth, and left a few bones and some tufts of wool of what
had been a lamb in the morning.  Nay, there were broad-footed tracks in
the snow only two years previously, which could not be mistaken;--the
black bear alone could have set that plantigrade seal, and little
children must come home early from school and play, for he is an
indiscriminate feeder when he is hungry, and a little child would not
come amiss when other game was wanting.

But these occasional visitors may have been mere wanderers, which,
straying along in the woods by day, and perhaps stalking through the
streets of still villages by night, had worked their way along down from
the ragged mountain-spurs of higher latitudes.  The one feature of The
Mountain that shed the brownest horror on its woods was the existence of
the terrible region known as Rattlesnake Ledge, and still tenanted by
those damnable reptiles, which distil a fiercer venom under our cold
northern sky than the cobra himself in the land of tropical spices and
poisons.

From the earliest settlement of the place, this fact had been, next to
the Indians, the reigning nightmare of the inhabitants.  It was easy
enough, after a time, to drive away the savages; for "a screeching Indian
Divell," as our fathers called him, could not crawl into the crack of a
rock to escape from his pursuers.  But the venomous population of
Rattlesnake Ledge had a Gibraltar for their fortress that might have
defied the siege-train dragged to the walls of Sebastopol.  In its deep
embrasures and its impregnable easemates they reared their families, they
met in love or wrath, they twined together in family knots, they hissed
defiance in hostile clans, they fed, slept, hibernated, and in due time
died in peace.  Many a foray had the towns-people made, and many a
stuffed skin was shown as a trophy,--nay, there were families where the
children's first toy was made from the warning appendage that once
vibrated to the wrath of one of these "cruel serpents."  Sometimes one of
them, coaxed out by a warm sun, would writhe himself down the hillside
into the roads, up the walks that led to houses,--worse than this, into
the long grass, where the barefooted mowers would soon pass with their
swinging scythes,--more rarely into houses, and on one memorable
occasion, early in the last century, into the meeting-house, where he
took a position on the pulpit-stairs,--as is narrated in the "Account of
Some Remarkable Providences," etc., where it is suggested that a strong
tendency of the Rev. Didymus Bean, the Minister at that time, towards the
Arminian Heresy may have had something to do with it, and that the
Serpent supposed to have been killed on the Pulpit-Stairs was a false
show of the Daemon's Contrivance, he having come in to listen to a
Discourse which was a sweet Savour in his Nostrils, and, of course, not
being capable of being killed Himself.  Others said, however, that,
though there was good Reason to think it was a Damon, yet he did come
with Intent to bite the Heel of that faithful Servant,--etc.

One Gilson is said to have died of the bite of a rattlesnake in this town
early in the present century.  After this there was a great snake-hunt,
in which very many of these venomous beasts were killed,--one in
particular, said to have been as big round as a stout man's arm, and to
have had no less than forty joints to his rattle,--indicating, according
to some, that he had lived forty years, but, if we might put any faith in
the Indian tradition, that he had killed forty human beings,--an idle
fancy, clearly.  This hunt, however, had no permanent effect in keeping
down the serpent population. Viviparous, creatures are a kind of
specie-paying lot, but oviparous ones only give their notes, as it were,
for a future brood,--an egg being, so to speak, a promise to pay a young
one by and by, if nothing happen.  Now the domestic habits of the
rattlesnake are not studied very closely, for obvious reasons; but it is,
no doubt, to all intents and purposes oviparous.  Consequently it has
large families, and is not easy to kill out.

In the year 184-, a melancholy proof was afforded to the inhabitants of
Rockland, that the brood which infested The Mountain was not extirpated.
A very interesting young married woman, detained at home at the time by
the state of her health, was bitten in the entry of her own house by a
rattlesnake which had found its way down from The Mountain.  Owing to the
almost instant employment of powerful remedies, the bite did not prove
immediately fatal; but she died within a few months of the time when she
was bitten.

All this seemed to throw a lurid kind of shadow over The Mountain. Yet,
as many years passed without any accident, people grew comparatively
careless, and it might rather be said to add a fearful kind of interest
to the romantic hillside, that the banded reptiles, which had been the
terror of the red men for nobody knows how many thousand years, were
there still, with the same poison-bags and spring-teeth at the white
men's service, if they meddled with them.

The other natural features of Rockland were such as many of our pleasant
country-towns can boast of.  A brook came tumbling down the mountain-side
and skirted the most thickly settled portion of the village.  In the
parts of its course where it ran through the woods, the water looked
almost as brown as coffee flowing from its urn,--to say like smoky quartz
would perhaps give a better idea,--but in the open plain it sparkled over
the pebbles white as a queen's diamonds. There were huckleberry-pastures
on the lower flanks of The Mountain, with plenty of the sweet-scented
bayberry mingled with the other bushes.  In other fields grew great store
of high-bush blackberries. Along the roadside were bayberry-bushes, hung
all over with bright red coral pendants in autumn and far into the
winter.  Then there were swamps set thick with dingy alders, where the
three-leaved arum and the skunk's-cabbage grew broad and succulent,
shelving down into black boggy pools here and there at the edge of which
the green frog, stupidest of his tribe, sat waiting to be victimized by
boy or snapping-turtle long after the shy and agile leopard-frog had
taken the six-foot spring that plumped him into the middle of the pool.
And on the neighboring banks the maiden-hair spread its flat disk of
embroidered fronds on the wire-like stem that glistened polished and
brown as the darkest tortoise-shell, and pale violets, cheated by the
cold skies of their hues and perfume, sunned themselves like
white-cheeked invalids.  Over these rose the old forest-trees,--the
maple, scarred with the wounds which had drained away its sweet
life-blood,--the beech, its smooth gray bark mottled so as to look like
the body of one of those great snakes of old that used to frighten
armies, always the mark of lovers' knives, as in the days of Musidora and
her swain,--the yellow birch, rough as the breast of Silenus in old
marbles,--the wild cherry, its little bitter fruit lying unheeded at its
foot,--and, soaring over all, the huge, coarse-barked, splintery-limbed,
dark-mantled hemlock, in the depth of whose aerial solitudes the crow
brooded on her nest unscared, and the gray squirrel lived unharmed till
his incisors grew to look like ram's-horns.

Rockland would have been but half a town without its pond; Guinnepeg Pond
was the name of it, but the young ladies of the Apollinean Institute were
very anxious that it should be called Crystalline Lake.  It was here that
the young folks used to sail in summer and skate in winter; here, too,
those queer, old, rum-scented good-for-nothing, lazy, story-telling,
half-vagabonds, who sawed a little wood or dug a few potatoes now and
then under the pretence of working for their living, used to go and fish
through the ice for pickerel every winter.  And here those three young
people were drowned, a few summers ago, by the upsetting of a sail-boat
in a sudden flaw of wind.  There is not one of these smiling ponds which
has not devoured more youths and maidens than any of those monsters the
ancients used to tell such lies about.  But it was a pretty pond, and
never looked more innocent--so the native "bard" of Rockland said in his
elegy--than on the morning when they found Sarah Jane and Ellen Maria
floating among the lily-pads.

The Apollinean Institute, or Institoot, as it was more commonly called,
was, in the language of its Prospectus, a "first-class Educational
Establishment."  It employed a considerable corps of instructors to rough
out and finish the hundred young lady scholars it sheltered beneath its
roof.  First, Mr. and Mrs. Peckham, the Principal and the Matron of the
school.  Silas Peckham was a thorough Yankee, born on a windy part of the
coast, and reared chiefly on salt-fish.  Everybody knows the type of
Yankee produced by this climate and diet: thin, as if he had been split
and dried; with an ashen kind of complexion, like the tint of the food he
is made of; and about as sharp, tough, juiceless, and biting to deal with
as the other is to the taste.  Silas Peckham kept a young ladies' school
exactly as he would have kept a hundred head of cattle,--for the simple,
unadorned purpose of making just as much money in just as few years as
could be safely done.  Mr. Peckham gave very little personal attention to
the department of instruction, but was always busy with contracts for
flour and potatoes, beef and pork, and other nutritive staples, the
amount of which required for such an establishment was enough to frighten
a quartermaster.  Mrs. Peckham was from the West, raised on Indian corn
and pork, which give a fuller outline and a more humid temperament, but
may perhaps be thought to render people a little coarse-fibred.  Her
specialty was to look after the feathering, cackling, roosting, rising,
and general behavior of these hundred chicks.  An honest, ignorant woman,
she could not have passed an examination in the youngest class.  So this
distinguished institution was under the charge of a commissary and a
housekeeper, and its real business was making money by taking young girls
in as boarders.

Connected with this, however, was the incidental fact, which the public
took for the principal one, namely, the business of instruction.  Mr.
Peckham knew well enough that it was just as well to have good
instructors as bad ones, so far as cost was concerned, and a great deal
better for the reputation of his feeding-establishment.  He tried to get
the best he could without paying too much, and, having got them, to screw
all the work out of them that could possibly be extracted.

There was a master for the English branches, with a young lady assistant.
There was another young lady who taught French, of the ahvaung and
baundahng style, which does not exactly smack of the asphalt of the
Boulevards.  There was also a German teacher of music, who sometimes
helped in French of the ahfaung and bauntaung style,--so that, between
the two, the young ladies could hardly have been mistaken for Parisians,
by a Committee of the French Academy.  The German teacher also taught a
Latin class after his fashion,--benna, a ben, gahboot, ahead, and so
forth.

The master for the English branches had lately left the school for
private reasons, which need not be here mentioned,--but he had gone, at
any rate, and it was his place which had been offered to Mr. Bernard
Langdon.  The offer came just in season,--as, for various causes, he was
willing to leave the place where he had begun his new experience.

It was on a fine morning that Mr. Bernard, ushered in by Mr. Peckham,
made his appearance in the great schoolroom of the Apollinean Institute.
A general rustle ran all round the seats when the handsome young man was
introduced.  The principal carried him to the desk of the young lady
English assistant, Miss Darley by name, and introduced him to her.

There was not a great deal of study done that day.  The young lady
assistant had to point out to the new master the whole routine in which
the classes were engaged when their late teacher left, and which had gone
on as well as it could since.  Then Master Langdon had a great many
questions to ask, some relating to his new duties, and some, perhaps,
implying a degree of curiosity not very unnatural under the
circumstances.  The truth is, the general effect of the schoolroom, with
its scores of young girls, all their eyes naturally centring on him with
fixed or furtive glances, was enough to bewilder and confuse a young man
like Master Langdon, though he was not destitute of self-possession, as
we have already seen.

You cannot get together a hundred girls, taking them as they come, from
the comfortable and affluent classes, probably anywhere, certainly not in
New England, without seeing a good deal of beauty. In fact, we very
commonly mean by beauty the way young girls look when there is nothing to
hinder their looking as Nature meant them to.  And the great schoolroom
of the Apollinean Institute did really make so pretty a show on the
morning when Master Langdon entered it, that he might be pardoned for
asking Miss Darley more questions about his scholars than about their
lessons.

There were girls of all ages: little creatures, some pallid and
delicate-looking, the offspring of invalid parents,--much given to books,
not much to mischief, commonly spoken of as particularly good children,
and contrasted with another sort, girls of more vigorous organization,
who were disposed to laughing and play, and required a strong hand to
manage them; then young growing misses of every shade of Saxon
complexion, and here and there one of more Southern hue: blondes, some of
them so translucent-looking that it seemed as if you could see the souls
in their bodies, like bubbles in glass, if souls were objects of sight;
brunettes, some with rose-red colors, and some with that swarthy hue
which often carries with it a heavily-shaded lip, and which, with pure
outlines and outspoken reliefs, gives us some of our handsomest
women,--the women whom ornaments of plain gold adorn more than any other
parures; and again, but only here and there, one with dark hair and gray
or blue eyes, a Celtic type, perhaps, but found in our native stock
occasionally; rarest of all, a light-haired girl with dark eyes, hazel,
brown, or of the color of that mountain-brook spoken of in this chapter,
where it ran through shadowy woodlands.  With these were to be seen at
intervals some of maturer years, full-blown flowers among the opening
buds, with that conscious look upon their faces which so many women wear
during the period when they never meet a single man without having his
monosyllable ready for him,--tied as they are, poor things! on the rock
of expectation, each of them an Andromeda waiting for her Perseus.

"Who is that girl in ringlets,--the fourth in the third row on the
right?" said Master Langdon.

"Charlotte Ann Wood," said Miss Darley; "writes very pretty poems."

"Oh!--And the pink one, three seats from her?  Looks bright; anything in
her?"

"Emma Dean,--day-scholar,--Squire Dean's daughter,--nice girl,--second
medal last year."

The master asked these two questions in a careless kind of way, and did
not seem to pay any too much attention to the answers.

"And who and what is that," he said,--"sitting a little apart
there,--that strange, wild-looking girl?"

This time he put the real question he wanted answered;--the other two
were asked at random, as masks for the third.

The lady-teacher's face changed;--one would have said she was frightened
or troubled.  She looked at the girl doubtfully, as if she might hear the
master's question and its answer.  But the girl did not look up;--she was
winding a gold chain about her wrist, and then uncoiling it, as if in a
kind of reverie.

Miss Darley drew close to the master and placed her hand so as to hide
her lips.  "Don't look at her as if we were talking about her," she
whispered softly; "that is Elsie Venner."




CHAPTER V.

AN OLD-FASHIONED DESCRIPTIVE CHAPTER.

It was a comfort to get to a place with something like society, with
residences which had pretensions to elegance, with people of some
breeding, with a newspaper, and "stores" to advertise in it, and with two
or three churches to keep each other alive by wholesome agitation.
Rockland was such a place.

Some of the natural features of the town have been described already. The
Mountain, of course, was what gave it its character, and redeemed it from
wearing the commonplace expression which belongs to ordinary
country-villages.  Beautiful, wild, invested with the mystery which
belongs to untrodden spaces, and with enough of terror to give it
dignity, it had yet closer relations with the town over which it brooded
than the passing stranger knew of.  Thus, it made a local climate by
cutting off the northern winds and holding the sun's heat like a
garden-wall.  Peachtrees, which, on the northern side of the mountain,
hardly ever came to fruit, ripened abundant crops in Rockland.

But there was still another relation between the mountain and the town at
its foot, which strangers were not likely to hear alluded to, and which
was oftener thought of than spoken of by its inhabitants. Those
high-impending forests,--"hangers," as White of Selborne would have
called them,--sloping far upward and backward into the distance, had
always an air of menace blended with their wild beauty.  It seemed as if
some heaven-scaling Titan had thrown his shaggy robe over the bare,
precipitous flanks of the rocky summit, and it might at any moment slide
like a garment flung carelessly on the nearest chance-support, and, so
sliding, crush the village out of being, as the Rossberg when it tumbled
over on the valley of Goldau.

Persons have been known to remove from the place, after a short residence
in it, because they were haunted day and night by the thought of this
awful green wall, piled up into the air over their heads.  They would lie
awake of nights, thinking they heard the muffed snapping of roots, as if
a thousand acres of the mountain-side were tugging to break away, like
the snow from a house-roof, and a hundred thousand trees were clinging
with all their fibres to hold back the soil just ready to peel away and
crash down with all its rocks and forest-growths.  And yet, by one of
those strange contradictions we are constantly finding in human nature,
there were natives of the town who would come back thirty or forty years
after leaving it, just to nestle under this same threatening
mountainside, as old men sun themselves against southward-facing walls.
The old dreams and legends of danger added to the attraction.  If the
mountain should ever slide, they had a kind of feeling as if they ought
to be there.  It was a fascination like that which the rattlesnake is
said to exert.

This comparison naturally suggests the recollection of that other source
of danger which was an element in the every-day life of the Rockland
people.  The folks in some of the neighboring towns had a joke against
them, that a Rocklander could n't hear a beanpod rattle without saying,
"The Lord have mercy on us!"  It is very true, that many a nervous old
lady has had a terrible start, caused by some mischievous young rogue's
giving a sudden shake to one of these noisy vegetable products in her
immediate vicinity.  Yet, strangely enough, many persons missed the
excitement of the possibility of a fatal bite in other regions, where
there were nothing but black and green and striped snakes, mean
ophidians, having the spite of the nobler serpent without his
venom,--poor crawling creatures, whom Nature would not trust with a
poison-bag.  Many natives of Rockland did unquestionably experience a
certain gratification in this infinitesimal sense of danger.  It was
noted that the old people retained their hearing longer than in other
places.  Some said it was the softened climate, but others believed it
was owing to the habit of keeping their ears open whenever they were
walking through the grass or in the woods.  At any rate, a slight sense
of danger is often an agreeable stimulus.  People sip their creme de
noyau with a peculiar tremulous pleasure, because there is a bare
possibility that it may contain prussic acid enough to knock them over;
in which case they will lie as dead as if a thunder-cloud had emptied
itself into the earth through their brain and marrow.

But Rockland had other features which helped to give it a special
character.  First of all, there was one grand street which was its chief
glory.  Elm Street it was called, naturally enough, for its elms made a
long, pointed-arched gallery of it through most of its extent.  No
natural Gothic arch compares, for a moment, with that formed by two
American elms, where their lofty jets of foliage shoot across each
other's ascending curves, to intermingle their showery flakes of green.
When one looks through a long double row of these, as in that lovely
avenue which the poets of Yale remember so well,

    "Oh, could the vista of my life but now as bright appear
     As when I first through Temple Street looked down thine espalier!"

he beholds a temple not built with hands, fairer than any minster, with
all its clustered stems and flowering capitals, that ever grew in stone.

Nobody knows New England who is not on terms of intimacy with one of its
elms.  The elm comes nearer to having a soul than any other vegetable
creature among us.  It loves man as man loves it.  It is modest and
patient.  It has a small flake of a seed which blows in everywhere and
makes arrangements for coming up by and by.  So, in spring, one finds a
crop of baby-elms among his carrots and parsnips, very weak and small
compared to those succulent vegetables.  The baby-elms die, most of them,
slain, unrecognized or unheeded, by hand or hoe, as meekly as Herod's
innocents.  One of them gets overlooked, perhaps, until it has
established a kind of right to stay.  Three generations of carrot and
parsnip consumers have passed away, yourself among them, and now let your
great-grandson look for the baby-elm.  Twenty-two feet of clean girth,
three hundred and sixty feet in the line that bounds its leafy circle, it
covers the boy with such a canopy as neither glossy-leafed oak nor
insect-haunted linden ever lifted into the summer skies.

Elm Street was the pride of Rockland, but not only on account of its
Gothic-arched vista.  In this street  were most of the great houses, or
"mansion-houses," as it was usual to call them.  Along this street, also,
the more nicely kept and neatly painted dwellings were chiefly
congregated.  It was the correct thing for a Rockland dignitary to have a
house in Elm Street.  A New England "mansion-house" is naturally square,
with dormer windows projecting from the roof, which has a balustrade with
turned posts round it.  It shows a good breadth of front-yard before its
door, as its owner shows a respectable expanse of a clean shirt-front.
It has a lateral margin beyond its stables and offices, as its master
wears his white wrist bands showing beyond his coat-cuffs.  It may not
have what can properly be called grounds, but it must have elbow-room, at
any rate. Without it, it is like a man who is always tight-buttoned for
want of any linen to show.  The mansion-house which has had to "button
itself up tight in fences, for want of green or gravel margin," will be
advertising for boarders presently.  The old English pattern of the New
England mansion-house, only on a somewhat grander scale, is Sir Thomas
Abney's place, where dear, good Dr. Watts said prayers for the family,
and wrote those blessed hymns of his that sing us into consciousness in
our cradles, and come back to us in sweet, single verses, between the
moments of wandering and of stupor, when we lie dying, and sound over us
when we can no longer hear them, bringing grateful tears to the hot,
aching eyes beneath the thick, black veils, and carrying the holy calm
with them which filled the good man's heart, as he prayed and sung under
the shelter of the old English mansion-house.  Next to the
mansion-houses, came the two-story trim, white-painted, "genteel" houses,
which, being more gossipy and less nicely bred, crowded close up to the
street, instead of standing back from it with arms akimbo, like the
mansion-houses. Their little front-yards were very commonly full of lilac
and syringa and other bushes, which were allowed to smother the lower
story almost to the exclusion of light and airy so that, what with small
windows and small windowpanes, and the darkness made by these choking
growths of shrubbery, the front parlors of some of these houses were the
most tomb-like, melancholy places that could be found anywhere among the
abodes of the living.  Their garnishing was apt to assist this
impression.  Large-patterned carpets, which always look discontented in
little rooms, haircloth furniture, black and shiny as beetles' wing
cases, and centre-tables, with a sullen oil-lamp of the kind called
astral by our imaginative ancestors, in the centre,--these things were
inevitable.  In set piles round the lamp was ranged the current
literature of the day, in the form of Temperance Documents, unbound
numbers of one of the Unknown Public's Magazines with worn-out steel
engravings and high-colored fashion-plates, the Poems of a distinguished
British author whom it is unnecessary to mention, a volume of sermons, or
a novel or two, or both, according to the tastes of the family, and the
Good Book, which is always Itself in the cheapest and commonest company.
The father of the family with his hand in the breast of his coat, the
mother of the same in a wide-bordered cap, sometimes a print of the Last
Supper, by no means Morghen's, or the Father of his Country, or the old
General, or the Defender of the Constitution, or an unknown clergyman
with an open book before him,--these were the usual ornaments of the
walls, the first two a matter of rigor, the others according to politics
and other tendencies.

This intermediate class of houses, wherever one finds them in New England
towns, are very apt to be cheerless and unsatisfactory.  They have
neither the luxury of the mansion-house nor the comfort of the
farm-house.  They are rarely kept at an agreeable temperature.  The
mansion-house has large fireplaces and generous chimneys, and is open to
the sunshine.  The farm-house makes no pretensions, but it has a good
warm kitchen, at any rate, and one can be comfortable there with the rest
of the family, without fear and without reproach.  These lesser
country-houses of genteel aspirations are much given to patent
subterfuges of one kind and another to get heat without combustion. The
chilly parlor and the slippery hair-cloth seat take the life out of the
warmest welcome.  If one would make these places wholesome, happy, and
cheerful, the first precept would be,--The dearest fuel, plenty of it,
and let half the heat go up the chimney.  If you can't afford this, don't
try to live in a "genteel" fashion, but stick to the ways of the honest
farm-house.

There were a good many comfortable farm-houses scattered about Rockland.
The best of them were something of the following pattern, which is too
often superseded of late by a more pretentious, but infinitely less
pleasing kind of rustic architecture.  A little back from the road,
seated directly on the green sod, rose a plain wooden building, two
stories in front, with a long roof sloping backwards to within a few feet
of the ground.  This, like the "mansion-house," is copied from an old
English pattern.  Cottages of this model may be seen in Lancashire, for
instance, always with the same honest, homely look, as if their roofs
acknowledged their relationship to the soil out of which they sprung.
The walls were unpainted, but turned by the slow action of sun and air
and rain to a quiet dove or slate color.  An old broken millstone at the
door,--a well-sweep pointing like a finger to the heavens, which the
shining round of water beneath looked up at like a dark unsleeping
eye,--a single large elm a little at one side,--a barn twice as big as
the house,--a cattle-yard, with

     "The white horns tossing above the wall,"--

some fields, in pasture or in crops, with low stone walls round them,--a
row of beehives,--a garden-patch, with roots, and currant-bushes, and
many-hued hollyhocks, and swollen-stemmed, globe-headed, seedling onions,
and marigolds and flower-de-luces, and lady's-delights, and peonies,
crowding in together, with southernwood in the borders, and woodbine and
hops and morning-glories climbing as they got a chance,--these were the
features by which the Rockland-born children remembered the farm-house,
when they had grown to be men. Such are the recollections that come over
poor sailor-boys crawling out on reeling yards to reef topsails as their
vessels stagger round the stormy Cape; and such are the flitting images
that make the eyes of old country-born merchants look dim and dreamy, as
they sit in their city palaces, warm with the after-dinner flush of the
red wave out of which Memory arises, as Aphrodite arose from the green
waves of the ocean.

Two meeting-houses stood on two eminences, facing each other, and looking
like a couple of fighting-cocks with their necks straight up in the
air,--as if they would flap their roofs, the next thing, and crow out of
their upstretched steeples, and peck at each other's glass eyes with
their sharp-pointed weathercocks.

The first was a good pattern of the real old-fashioned New England
meeting-house.  It was a large barn with windows, fronted by a square
tower crowned with a kind of wooden bell inverted and raised on legs, out
of which rose a slender spire with the sharp-billed weathercock at its
summit.  Inside, tall, square pews with flapping seats, and a gallery
running round three sides of the building.  On the fourth side the
pulpit, with a huge, dusty sounding-board hanging over it. Here preached
the Reverend Pierrepont Honeywood, D. D., successor, after a number of
generations, to the office and the parsonage of the Reverend Didymus
Bean, before mentioned, but not suspected of any of his alleged heresies.
He held to the old faith of the Puritans, and occasionally delivered a
discourse which was considered by the hard-headed theologians of his
parish to have settled the whole matter fully and finally, so that now
there was a good logical basis laid down for the Millennium, which might
begin at once upon the platform of his demonstrations.  Yet the Reverend
Dr. Honeywood was fonder of preaching plain, practical sermons about the
duties of life, and showing his Christianity in abundant good works among
his people.  It was noticed by some few of his flock, not without
comment, that the great majority of his texts came from the Gospels, and
this more and more as he became interested in various benevolent
enterprises which brought him into relations with-ministers and
kindhearted laymen of other denominations.  He was in fact a man of a
very warm, open, and exceedingly human disposition, and, although bred by
a clerical father, whose motto was "Sit anima mea cum Puritanis," he
exercised his human faculties in the harness of his ancient faith with
such freedom that the straps of it got so loose they did not interfere
greatly with the circulation of the warm blood through his system. Once
in a while he seemed to think it necessary to come out with a grand
doctrinal sermon, and them he would lapse away for a while into preaching
on men's duties to each other and to society, and hit hard, perhaps, at
some of the actual vices of the time and place, and insist with such
tenderness and eloquence on the great depth and breadth of true Christian
love and charity, that his oldest deacon shook his head, and wished he
had shown as much interest when he was preaching, three Sabbaths back, on
Predestination, or in his discourse against the Sabellians.  But he was
sound in the faith; no doubt of that.  Did he not preside at the council
held in the town of Tamarack, on the other side of the mountain, which
expelled its clergyman for maintaining heretical doctrines?  As presiding
officer, he did not vote, of course, but there was no doubt that he was
all right; he had some of the Edwards blood in him, and that couldn't
very well let him go wrong.

The meeting-house on the other and opposite summit was of a more modern
style, considered by many a great improvement on the old New England
model, so that it is not uncommon for a country parish to pull down its
old meeting-house, which has been preached in for a hundred years or so,
and put up one of these more elegant edifices. The new building was in
what may be called the florid shingle-Gothic manner.  Its pinnacles and
crockets and other ornaments were, like the body of the building, all of
pine wood,--an admirable material, as it is very soft and easily worked,
and can be painted of any color desired.  Inside, the walls were stuccoed
in imitation of stone,--first a dark brown square, then two light brown
squares, then another dark brown square, and so on, to represent the
accidental differences of shade always noticeable in the real stones of
which walls are built.  To be sure, the architect could not help getting
his party-colored squares in almost as regular rhythmical order as those
of a chess-board; but nobody can avoid doing things in a systematic and
serial way; indeed, people who wish to plant trees in natural chimps know
very well that they cannot keep from making regular lines and symmetrical
figures, unless by some trick or other, as that one of throwing a peck of
potatoes up into the air and sticking in a tree wherever a potato happens
to fall.  The pews of this meeting-house were the usual oblong ones,
where people sit close together, with a ledge before them to support
their hymn-books, liable only to occasional contact with the back of the
next pew's heads or bonnets, and a place running under the seat of that
pew where hats could be deposited,--always at the risk of the owner, in
case of injury by boots or crickets.

In this meeting-house preached the Reverend Chauncy Fairweather, a divine
of the "Liberal" school, as it is commonly called, bred at that famous
college which used to be thought, twenty or thirty years ago, to have the
monopoly of training young men in the milder forms of heresy.  His
ministrations were attended with decency, but not followed with
enthusiasm.  "The beauty of virtue" got to be an old story at last.  "The
moral dignity of human nature" ceased to excite a thrill of satisfaction,
after some hundred repetitions.  It grew to be a dull business, this
preaching against stealing and intemperance, while he knew very well that
the thieves were prowling round orchards and empty houses, instead of
being there to hear the sermon, and that the drunkards, being rarely
church-goers, get little good by the statistics and eloquent appeals of
the preacher.  Every now and then, however, the Reverend Mr. Fairweather
let off a polemic discourse against his neighbor opposite, which waked
his people up a little; but it was a languid congregation, at best,--very
apt to stay away from meeting in the afternoon, and not at all given to
extra evening services.  The minister, unlike his rival of the other side
of the way, was a down-hearted and timid kind of man.  He went on
preaching as he had been taught to preach, but he had misgivings at
times. There was a little Roman Catholic church at the foot of the hill
where his own was placed, which he always had to pass on Sundays.  He
could never look on the thronging multitudes that crowded its pews and
aisles or knelt bare-headed on its steps, without a longing to get in
among them and go down on his knees and enjoy that luxury of devotional
contact which makes a worshipping throng as different from the same
numbers praying apart as a bed of coals is from a trail of scattered
cinders.

"Oh, if I could but huddle in with those poor laborers and working-women!"
he would say to himself.  "If I could but breathe that atmosphere,
stifling though it be, yet made holy by ancient litanies, and cloudy with
the smoke of hallowed incense, for one hour, instead of droning over
these moral precepts to my half-sleeping congregation!"  The intellectual
isolation of his sect preyed upon him; for, of all terrible things to
natures like his, the most terrible is to belong to a minority.  No
person that looked at his thin and sallow cheek, his sunken and sad eye,
his tremulous lip, his contracted forehead, or who heard his querulous,
though not unmusical voice, could fail to see that his life was an uneasy
one, that he was engaged in some inward conflict.  His dark, melancholic
aspect contrasted with his seemingly cheerful creed, and was all the more
striking, as the worthy Dr. Honeywood, professing a belief which made him
a passenger on board a shipwrecked planet, was yet a most good-humored
and companionable gentleman, whose laugh on week-days did one as much
good to listen to as the best sermon he ever delivered on a Sunday.

A mile or two from the centre of Rockland was a pretty little Episcopal
church, with a roof like a wedge of cheese, a square tower, a stained
window, and a trained rector, who read the service with such ventral
depth of utterance and rrreduplication of the rrresonant letter, that his
own mother would not have known him for her son, if the good woman had
not ironed his surplice and put it on with her own hands.

There were two public-houses in the place: one dignified with the name of
the Mountain House, somewhat frequented by city people in the summer
months, large-fronted, three-storied, balconied, boasting a distinct
ladies'-drawing-room, and spreading a table d'hote of some pretensions;
the other, "Pollard's Tahvern," in the common speech,--a two-story
building, with a bar-room, once famous, where there was a great smell of
hay and boots and pipes and all other bucolic-flavored elements,--where
games of checkers were played on the back of the bellows with red and
white kernels of corn, or with beans and coffee, where a man slept in a
box-settle at night, to wake up early passengers,--where teamsters came
in, with wooden-handled whips and coarse frocks, reinforcing the bucolic
flavor of the atmosphere, and middle-aged male gossips, sometimes
including the squire of the neighboring law-office, gathered to exchange
a question or two about the news, and then fall into that solemn state of
suspended animation which the temperance bar-rooms of modern days produce
in human beings, as the Grotta del Cane does in dogs in the well-known
experiments related by travellers.  This bar-room used to be famous for
drinking and storytelling, and sometimes fighting, in old times. That was
when there were rows of decanters on the shelf behind the bar, and a
hissing vessel of hot water ready, to make punch, and three or four
loggerheads (long irons clubbed at the end) were always lying in the fire
in the cold season, waiting to be plunged into sputtering and foaming
mugs of flip,--a goodly compound; speaking according to the flesh, made
with beer and sugar, and a certain suspicion of strong waters, over which
a little nutmeg being grated, and in it the hot iron being then allowed
to sizzle, there results a peculiar singed aroma, which the wise regard
as a warning to remove themselves at once out of the reach of temptation.

But the bar of Pollard's Tahvern no longer presented its old attractions,
and the loggerheads had long disappeared from the fire. In place of the
decanters, were boxes containing "lozengers," as they were commonly
called, sticks of candy in jars, cigars in tumblers, a few lemons, grown
hard-skinned and marvellously shrunken by long exposure, but still feebly
suggestive of possible lemonade,--the whole ornamented by festoons of
yellow and blue cut flypaper.  On the front shelf of the bar stood a
large German-silver pitcher of water, and scattered about were
ill-conditioned lamps, with wicks that always wanted picking, which
burned red and smoked a good deal, and were apt to go out without any
obvious cause, leaving strong reminiscences of the whale-fishery in the
circumambient air.

The common schoolhouses of Rockland were dwarfed by the grandeur of the
Apollinean Institute.  The master passed one of them, in a walk he was
taking, soon after his arrival at Rockland.  He looked in at the rows of
desks, and recalled his late experiences.  He could not help laughing, as
he thought how neatly he had knocked the young butcher off his pins.

"A little science is a dangerous thing, 'as well as a little 'learning,'"
he said to himself; "only it's dangerous to the fellow you' try it on."
And he cut him a good stick, and began climbing the side of The Mountain
to get a look at that famous Rattlesnake Ledge.




CHAPTER VI.

THE SUNBEAM AND THE SHADOW.

The virtue of the world is not mainly in its leaders.  In the midst of
the multitude which follows there is often something better than in the
one that goes before.  Old generals wanted to take Toulon, but one of
their young colonels showed them how.  The junior counsel has been known
not unfrequently to make a better argument than his senior fellow,--if,
indeed, he did not make both their arguments.  Good ministers will tell
you they have parishioners who beat them in the practice of the virtues.
A great establishment, got up on commercial principles, like the
Apollinean Institute, might yet be well carried on, if it happened to get
good teachers.  And when Master Langdon came to see its management, he
recognized that there must be fidelity and intelligence somewhere among
the instructors.  It was only necessary to look for a moment at the fair,
open forehead, the still, tranquil eye of gentle, habitual authority, the
sweet gravity that lay upon the lips, to hear the clear answers to the
pupils' questions, to notice how every request had the force without the
form of a command, and the young man could not doubt that the good genius
of the school stood before him in the person of Helen barley.

It was the old story.  A poor country-clergyman dies, and leaves a widow
and a daughter.  In Old England the daughter would have eaten the bitter
bread of a governess in some rich family.  In New England she must keep a
school.  So, rising from one sphere to another, she at length finds
herself the prima donna in the department of instruction in Mr. Silas
Peckham's educational establishment.

What a miserable thing it is to be poor.  She was dependent, frail,
sensitive, conscientious.  She was in the power of a hard, grasping,
thin-blooded, tough-fibred, trading educator, who neither knew nor cared
for a tender woman's sensibilities, but who paid her and meant to have
his money's worth out of her brains, and as much more than his money's
worth as he could get.  She was consequently, in plain English,
overworked, and an overworked woman is always a sad sight,--sadder a
great deal than an overworked man, because she is so much more fertile in
capacities of suffering than a man.  She has so many varieties of
headache,--sometimes as if Jael were driving the nail that killed Sisera
into her temples,--sometimes letting her work with half her brain while
the other half throbs as if it would go to pieces,--sometimes tightening
round the brows as if her cap-band were a ring of iron,--and then her
neuralgias, and her backaches, and her fits of depression, in which she
thinks she is nothing and less than nothing, and those paroxysms which
men speak slightingly of as hysterical,--convulsions, that is all, only
not commonly fatal ones,--so many trials which belong to her fine and
mobile structure,--that she is always entitled to pity, when she is
placed in conditions which develop her nervous tendencies.

The poor young lady's work had, of course, been doubled since the
departure of Master Langdon's predecessor.  Nobody knows what the
weariness of instruction is, as soon as the teacher's faculties begin to
be overtasked, but those who have tried it.  The relays of fresh pupils,
each new set with its exhausting powers in full action, coming one after
another, take out all the reserved forces and faculties of resistance
from the subject of their draining process.

The day's work was over, and it was late in the evening, when she sat
down, tired and faint, with a great bundle of girls' themes or
compositions to read over before she could rest her weary head on the
pillow of her narrow trundle-bed, and forget for a while the treadmill
stair of labor she was daily climbing.

How she dreaded this most forlorn of all a teacher's tasks!  She was
conscientious in her duties, and would insist on reading every
sentence,--there was no saying where she might find faults of grammar or
bad spelling.  There might have been twenty or thirty of these themes in
the bundle before her.  Of course she knew pretty well the leading
sentiments they could contain: that beauty was subject to the accidents
of time; that wealth was inconstant, and existence uncertain; that virtue
was its own reward; that youth exhaled, like the dewdrop from the flower,
ere the sun had reached its meridian; that life was o'ershadowed with
trials; that the lessons of virtue instilled by our beloved teachers were
to be our guides through all our future career.  The imagery employed
consisted principally of roses, lilies, birds, clouds, and brooks, with
the celebrated comparison of wayward genius to meteor.  Who does not know
the small, slanted, Italian hand of these girls'-compositions, their
stringing together of the good old traditional copy-book phrases; their
occasional gushes of sentiment, their profound estimates of the world,
sounding to the old folks that read them as the experience of a bantam
pullet's last-hatched young one with the chips of its shell on its head
would sound to a Mother Cary's chicken, who knew the great ocean with all
its typhoons and tornadoes?  Yet every now and then one is liable to be
surprised with strange clairvoyant flashes, that can hardly be explained,
except by the mysterious inspiration which every now and then seizes a
young girl and exalts her intelligence, just as hysteria in other
instances exalts the sensibility,--a little something of that which made
Joan of Arc, and the Burney girl who prophesied "Evelina," and the
Davidson sisters. In the midst of these commonplace exercises which Miss
Darley read over so carefully were two or three that had something of
individual flavor about them, and here and there there was an image or an
epithet which showed the footprint of a passionate nature, as a fallen
scarlet feather marks the path the wild flamingo has trodden.

The young lady-teacher read them with a certain indifference of manner,
as one reads proofs--noting defects of detail, but not commonly arrested
by the matters treated of.  Even Miss Charlotte Ann Wood's poem,
beginning--

          "How sweet at evening's balmy hour,"

did not excite her.  She marked the inevitable false rhyme of Cockney and
Yankee beginners, morn and dawn, and tossed the verses on the pile of
papers she had finished.  She was looking over some of the last of them
in a rather listless way,--for the poor thing was getting sleepy in spite
of herself,--when she came to one which seemed to rouse her attention,
and lifted her drooping lids.  She looked at it a moment before she would
touch it.  Then she took hold of it by one corner and slid it off from
the rest.  One would have said she was afraid of it, or had some
undefined antipathy which made it hateful to her.  Such odd fancies are
common enough in young persons in her nervous state.  Many of these young
people will jump up twenty times a day and run to dabble the tips of
their fingers in water, after touching the most inoffensive objects.

This composition was written in a singular, sharp-pointed, long, slender
hand, on a kind of wavy, ribbed paper.  There was something strangely
suggestive about the look of it, but exactly of what, Miss barley either
could not or did not try to think.  The subject of the paper was The
Mountain,--the composition being a sort of descriptive rhapsody.  It
showed a startling familiarity with some of the savage scenery of the
region.  One would have said that the writer must have threaded its
wildest solitudes by the light of the moon and stars as well as by day.
As the teacher read on, her color changed, and a kind of tremulous
agitation came over her.  There were hints in this strange paper she did
not know what to make of.  There was something in its descriptions and
imagery that recalled,--Miss Darley could not say what,--but it made her
frightfully nervous.  Still she could not help reading, till she came to
one passage which so agitated her, that the tired and over-wearied girl's
self-control left her entirely.  She sobbed once or twice, then laughed
convulsively; and flung herself on the bed, where she worked out a set
hysteric spasm as she best might, without anybody to rub her hands and
see that she did not hurt herself.

By and by she got quiet, rose and went to her bookcase, took down a
volume of Coleridge, and read a short time, and so to bed, to sleep and
wake from time to time with a sudden start out of uneasy dreams.

Perhaps it is of no great consequence what it was in the composition
which set her off into this nervous paroxysm.  She was in such a state
that almost any slight agitation would have brought on the attack, and it
was the accident of her transient excitability, very probably, which made
a trifling cause the seeming occasion of so much disturbance.  The theme
was signed, in the same peculiar, sharp, slender hand, E. Venner, and
was, of course, written by that wild-looking girl who had excited the
master's curiosity and prompted his question, as before mentioned.  The
next morning the lady-teacher looked pale and wearied, naturally enough,
but she was in her place at the usual hour, and Master Langdon in his
own.

The girls had not yet entered the school room.

"You have been ill, I am afraid," said Mr. Bernard.

"I was not well yesterday," she, answered.  "I had a worry and a kind of
fright.  It is so dreadful to have the charge of all these young souls
and bodies.  Every young girl ought to walk locked close, arm in arm,
between two guardian angels.  Sometimes I faint almost with the thought
of all that I ought to do, and of my own weakness and wants.--Tell me,
are there not natures born so out of parallel with the lines of natural
law that nothing short of a miracle can bring them right?"

Mr. Bernard had speculated somewhat, as all thoughtful persons of his
profession are forced to do, on the innate organic tendencies with which
individuals, families, and races are born.  He replied, therefore, with a
smile, as one to whom the question suggested a very familiar class of
facts.

"Why, of course.  Each of us is only the footing-up of a double column of
figures that goes back to the first pair.  Every unit tells,--and some of
them are plus, and some minus.  If the columns don't add up right, it is
commonly because we can't make out all the figures.  I don't mean to say
that something may not be added by Nature to make up for losses and keep
the race to its average, but we are mainly nothing but the answer to a
long sum in addition and subtraction.  No doubt there are people born
with impulses at every possible angle to the parallels of Nature, as you
call them.  If they happen to cut these at right angles, of course they
are beyond the reach of common influences.  Slight obliquities are what
we have most to do with in education.  Penitentiaries and insane asylums
take care of most of the right-angle cases.--I am afraid I have put it
too much like a professor, and I am only a student, you know.  Pray, what
set you to asking me this?  Any strange cases among the scholars?"

The meek teacher's blue eyes met the luminous glance that came with the
question.  She, too, was of gentle blood,--not meaning by that that she
was of any noted lineage, but that she came of a cultivated stock, never
rich, but long trained to intellectual callings.  A thousand decencies,
amenities, reticences, graces, which no one thinks of until he misses
them, are the traditional right of those who spring from such families.
And when two persons of this exceptional breeding meet in the midst of
the common multitude, they seek each other's company at once by the
natural law of elective affinity.  It is wonderful how men and women know
their peers.  If two stranger queens, sole survivors of two shipwrecked
vessels, were cast, half-naked, on a rock together, each would at once
address the other as "Our Royal Sister."

Helen Darley looked into the dark eyes of Bernard Langdon glittering with
the light which flashed from them with his question.  Not as those
foolish, innocent country-girls of the small village did she look into
them, to be fascinated and bewildered, but to sound them with a calm,
steadfast purpose.  "A gentleman," she said to herself, as she read his
expression and his features with a woman's rapid, but exhausting glance.
"A lady," he said to himself, as he met her questioning look,--so brief,
so quiet, yet so assured, as of one whom necessity had taught to read
faces quickly without offence, as children read the faces of parents, as
wives read the faces of hard-souled husbands.  All this was but a few
seconds' work, and yet the main point was settled.  If there had been any
vulgar curiosity or coarseness of any kind lurking in his expression, she
would have detected it.  If she had not lifted her eyes to his face so
softly and kept them there so calmly and withdrawn them so quietly, he
would not have said to himself, "She is a LADY," for that word meant a
good deal to the descendant of the courtly Wentworths and the scholarly
Langdons.

"There are strange people everywhere, Mr. Langdon," she said, "and I
don't think our schoolroom is an exception.  I am glad you believe in the
force of transmitted tendencies.  It would break my heart, if I did not
think that there are faults beyond the reach of everything but God's
special grace.  I should die, if I thought that my negligence or
incapacity was alone responsible for the errors and sins of those I have
charge of.  Yet there are mysteries I do not know how to account for."
She looked all round the schoolroom, and then said, in a whisper, "Mr.
Langdon, we had a girl that stole, in the school, not long ago.  Worse
than that, we had a girl who tried to set us on fire.  Children of good
people, both of them.  And we have a girl now that frightens me so"--

The door opened, and three misses came in to take their seats: three
types, as it happened, of certain classes, into which it would not have
been difficult to distribute the greater number of the girls in the
school.--Hannah Martin.  Fourteen years and three months old.
Short-necked, thick-waisted, round-cheeked, smooth, vacant forehead,
large, dull eyes.  Looks good-natured, with little other expression.
Three buns in her bag, and a large apple.  Has a habit of attacking her
provisions in school-hours.--Rosa Milburn.  Sixteen.  Brunette, with a
rare-ripe flush in her cheeks.  Color comes and goes easily. Eyes
wandering, apt to be downcast.  Moody at times.  Said to be passionate,
if irritated.  Finished in high relief.  Carries shoulders well back and
walks well, as if proud of her woman's life, with a slight rocking
movement, being one of the wide-flanged pattern, but seems restless,--a
hard girl to look after.  Has a romance in her pocket, which she means to
read in school-time.--Charlotte Ann Wood.  Fifteen.  The poetess before
mentioned.  Long, light ringlets, pallid complexion, blue eyes.  Delicate
child, half unfolded.  Gentle, but languid and despondent.  Does not go
much with the other girls, but reads a good deal, especially poetry,
underscoring favorite passages.  Writes a great many verses, very fast,
not very correctly; full of the usual human sentiments, expressed in the
accustomed phrases.  Under-vitalized.  Sensibilities not covered with
their normal integuments.  A negative condition, often confounded with
genius, and sometimes running into it.  Young people who fall out of line
through weakness of the active faculties are often confounded with those
who step out of it through strength of the intellectual ones.

The girls kept coming in, one after another, or in pairs or groups, until
the schoolroom was nearly full.  Then there was a little pause, and a
light step was heard in the passage.  The lady-teacher's eyes turned to
the door, and the master's followed them in the same direction.

A girl of about seventeen entered.  She was tall and slender, but
rounded, with a peculiar undulation of movement, such as one sometimes
sees in perfectly untutored country-girls, whom Nature, the queen of
graces, has taken in hand, but more commonly in connection with the very
highest breeding of the most thoroughly trained society.  She was a
splendid scowling beauty, black-browed, with a flash of white teeth which
was always like a surprise when her lips parted.  She wore a checkered
dress, of a curious pattern, and a camel's-hair scarf twisted a little
fantastically about her.  She went to her seat, which she had moved a
short distance apart from the rest, and, sitting down, began playing
listlessly with her gold chain, as was a common habit with her, coiling
it and uncoiling it about her slender wrist, and braiding it in with her
long, delicate fingers.  Presently she looked up.  Black, piercing eyes,
not large,--a low forehead, as low as that of Clytie in the Townley
bust,--black hair, twisted in heavy braids,--a face that one could not
help looking at for its beauty, yet that one wanted to look away from for
something in its expression, and could not for those diamond eyes. They
were fixed on the lady-teacher now.  The latter turned her own away, and
let them wander over the other scholars. But they could not help coming
back again for a single glance at the wild beauty. The diamond eyes were
on her still.  She turned the leaves of several of her books, as if in
search of some passage, and, when she thought she had waited long enough
to be safe, once more stole a quick look at the dark girl. The diamond
eyes were still upon her.  She put her kerchief to her forehead, which
had grown slightly moist; she sighed once, almost shivered, for she felt
cold; then, following some ill-defined impulse, which she could not
resist, she left her place and went to the young girl's desk.

"What do you want of me, Elsie Venner?"  It was a strange question to
put, for the girl had not signified that she wished the teacher to come
to her.

"Nothing," she said.  "I thought I could make you come."  The girl spoke
in a low tone, a kind of half-whisper.  She did not lisp, yet her
articulation of one or two consonants was not absolutely perfect.

"Where did you get that flower, Elsie?" said Miss Darley.  It was a rare
alpine flower, which was found only in one spot among the rocks of The
Mountain.

"Where it grew," said Elsie Veneer.  "Take it."  The teacher could not
refuse her.  The girl's finger tips touched hers as she took it.  How
cold they were for a girl of such an organization!

The teacher went back to her seat.  She made an excuse for quitting the
schoolroom soon afterwards.  The first thing she did was to fling the
flower into her fireplace and rake the ashes over it.  The second was to
wash the tips of her fingers, as if she had been another Lady Macbeth.  A
poor, over-tasked, nervous creature,--we must not think too much of her
fancies.

After school was done, she finished the talk with the master which had
been so suddenly interrupted.  There were things spoken of which may
prove interesting by and by, but there are other matters we must first
attend to.




CHAPTER VII.

THE EVENT OF THE SEASON.

"Mr. and Mrs. Colonel Sprowle's compliments to Mr. Langdon and requests
the pleasure of his company at a social entertainment on Wednesday
evening next.
         "Elm St. Monday."

On paper of a pinkish color and musky smell, with a large "S" at the top,
and an embossed border.  Envelop adherent, not sealed. Addressed

          LANGDON ESQ.
          Present.

Brought by H. Frederic Sprowle, youngest son of the Colonel,--the H. of
course standing for the paternal Hezekiah, put in to please the father,
and reduced to its initial to please the mother, she having a marked
preference for Frederic.  Boy directed to wait for an answer.

"Mr. Langdon has the pleasure of accepting Mr. and Mrs. Colonel Sprowle's
polite invitation for Wednesday evening."

On plain paper, sealed with an initial.

In walking along the main street, Mr. Bernard had noticed a large house
of some pretensions to architectural display, namely, unnecessarily
projecting eaves, giving it a mushroomy aspect, wooden mouldings at
various available points, and a grandiose arched portico.  It looked a
little swaggering by the side of one or two of the mansion-houses that
were not far from it, was painted too bright for Mr. Bernard's taste, had
rather too fanciful a fence before it, and had some fruit-trees planted
in the front-yard, which to this fastidious young gentleman implied a
defective sense of the fitness of things, not promising in people who
lived in so large a house, with a mushroom roof and a triumphal arch for
its entrance.

This place was known as "Colonel Sprowle's villa," (genteel friends,)--as
"the elegant residence of our distinguished fellow-citizen, Colonel
Sprowle," (Rockland Weekly Universe,)--as "the neew haouse," (old
settlers,)--as "Spraowle's Folly," (disaffected and possibly envious
neighbors,)--and in common discourse, as "the Colonel's."

Hezekiah Sprowle, Esquire, Colonel Sprowle of the Commonwealth's Militia,
was a retired "merchant."  An India merchant he might, perhaps, have been
properly called; for he used to deal in West India goods, such as coffee,
sugar, and molasses, not to speak of rum,--also in tea, salt fish,
butter and cheese, oil and candles, dried fruit, agricultural "p'doose"
generally, industrial products, such as boots and shoes, and various
kinds of iron and wooden ware, and at one end of the establishment in
calicoes and other stuffs,--to say nothing of miscellaneous objects of
the most varied nature, from sticks of candy, which tempted in the
smaller youth with coppers in their fists, up to ornamental articles of
apparel, pocket-books, breast-pins, gilt-edged Bibles, stationery, in
short, everything which was like to prove seductive to the rural
population.  The Colonel had made money in trade, and also by matrimony.
He had married Sarah, daughter and heiress of the late Tekel Jordan,
Esq., an old miser, who gave the town-clock, which carries his name to
posterity in large gilt letters as a generous benefactor of his native
place.  In due time the Colonel reaped the reward of well-placed
affections.  When his wife's inheritance fell in, he thought he had money
enough to give up trade, and therefore sold out his "store," called in
some dialects of the English language shop, and his business.

Life became pretty hard work to him, of course, as soon as he had nothing
particular to do.  Country people with money enough not to have to work
are in much more danger than city people in the same condition.  They get
a specific look and character, which are the same in all the villages
where one studies them.  They very commonly fall into a routine, the
basis of which is going to some lounging-place or other, a bar-room, a
reading-room, or something of the kind. They grow slovenly in dress, and
wear the same hat forever.  They have a feeble curiosity for news
perhaps, which they take daily as a man takes his bitters, and then fall
silent and think they are thinking.  But the mind goes out under this
regimen, like a fire without a draught; and it is not very strange, if
the instinct of mental self-preservation drives them to brandy-and-water,
which makes the hoarse whisper of memory musical for a few brief moments,
and puts a weak leer of promise on the features of the hollow-eyed
future.  The Colonel was kept pretty well in hand as yet by his wife, and
though it had happened to him once or twice to come home rather late at
night with a curious tendency to say the same thing twice and even three
times over, it had always been in very cold weather,--and everybody knows
that no one is safe to drink a couple of glasses of wine in a warm room
and go suddenly out into the cold air.

Miss Matilda Sprowle, sole daughter of the house, had reached the age at
which young ladies are supposed in technical language to have come out,
and thereafter are considered to be in company.

"There's one piece o' goods," said the Colonel to his wife, "that we
ha'n't disposed of, nor got a customer for yet.  That 's Matildy.  I
don't mean to set HER up at vaandoo.  I guess she can have her pick of a
dozen."

"She 's never seen anybody yet," said Mrs. Sprowle, who had had a certain
project for some time, but had kept quiet about it.  "Let's have a party,
and give her a chance to show herself and see some of the young folks."

The Colonel was not very clear-headed, and he thought, naturally enough,
that the party was his own suggestion, because his remark led to the
first starting of the idea.  He entered into the plan, therefore, with a
feeling of pride as well as pleasure, and the great project was resolved
upon in a family council without a dissentient voice.  This was the
party, then, to which Mr. Bernard was going. The town had been full of it
for a week.  "Everybody was asked."  So everybody said that was invited.
But how in respect of those who were not asked?  If it had been one of
the old mansion-houses that was giving a party, the boundary between the
favored and the slighted families would have been known pretty well
beforehand, and there would have been no great amount of grumbling.  But
the Colonel, for all his title, had a forest of poor relations and a
brushwood swamp of shabby friends, for he had scrambled up to fortune,
and now the time was come when he must define his new social position.

This is always an awkward business in town or country.  An exclusive
alliance between two powers is often the same thing as a declaration of
war against a third.  Rockland was soon split into a triumphant minority,
invited to Mrs. Sprowle's party, and a great majority, uninvited, of
which the fraction just on the border line between recognized "gentility"
and the level of the ungloved masses was in an active state of excitement
and indignation.

"Who is she, I should like to know?"  said Mrs. Saymore, the tailor's
wife.  "There was plenty of folks in Rockland as good as ever Sally
Jordan was, if she had managed to pick up a merchant.  Other folks could
have married merchants, if their families was n't as wealthy as them old
skinflints that willed her their money," etc., etc.  Mrs. Saymore
expressed the feeling of many beside herself.  She had, however, a
special right to be proud of the name she bore.  Her husband was own
cousin to the Saymores of Freestone Avenue (who write the name Seymour,
and claim to be of the Duke of Somerset's family, showing a clear descent
from the Protector to Edward Seymour, (1630,)--then a jump that would
break a herald's neck to one Seth Saymore,(1783,)--from whom to the head
of the present family the line is clear again).  Mrs. Saymore, the
tailor's wife, was not invited, because her husband mended clothes.  If
he had confined himself strictly to making them, it would have put a
different face upon the matter.

The landlord of the Mountain House and his lady were invited to Mrs.
Sprowle's party.  Not so the landlord of Pollard's Tahvern and his lady.
Whereupon the latter vowed that they would have a party at their house
too, and made arrangements for a dance of twenty or thirty couples, to be
followed by an entertainment.  Tickets to this "Social Ball" were soon
circulated, and, being accessible to all at a moderate price, admission
to the "Elegant Supper" included, this second festival promised to be as
merry, if not as select, as the great party.

Wednesday came.  Such doings had never been heard of in Rockland as went
on that day at the "villa."  The carpet had been taken up in the long
room, so that the young folks might have a dance.  Miss Matilda's piano
had been moved in, and two fiddlers and a clarionet-player engaged to
make music.  All kinds of lamps had been put in requisition, and even
colored wax-candles figured on the mantel-pieces.  The costumes of the
family had been tried on the day before: the Colonel's black suit fitted
exceedingly well; his lady's velvet dress displayed her contours to
advantage; Miss Matilda's flowered silk was considered superb; the eldest
son of the family, Mr. T. Jordan Sprowle, called affectionately and
elegantly "Geordie," voted himself "stunnin'"; and even the small youth
who had borne Mr. Bernard's invitation was effective in a new jacket and
trousers, buttony in front, and baggy in the reverse aspect, as is wont
to be the case with the home-made garments of inland youngsters.

Great preparations had been made for the refection which was to be part
of the entertainment.  There was much clinking of borrowed spoons, which
were to be carefully counted, and much clicking of borrowed china, which
was to be tenderly handled, for nobody in the country keeps those vast
closets full of such things which one may see in rich city-houses.  Not a
great deal could be done in the way of flowers, for there were no
greenhouses, and few plants were out as yet; but there were paper
ornaments for the candlesticks, and colored mats for the lamps, and all
the tassels of the curtains and bells were taken out of those brown linen
bags, in which, for reasons hitherto undiscovered, they are habitually
concealed in some households.  In the remoter apartments every imaginable
operation was going on at once,--roasting, boiling, baking, beating,
rolling, pounding in mortars, frying, freezing; for there was to be
ice-cream to-night of domestic manufacture;--and in the midst of all
these labors, Mrs. Sprowle and Miss Matilda were moving about, directing
and helping as they best might, all day long.  When the evening came, it
might be feared they would not be in just the state of mind and body to
entertain company.

--One would like to give a party now and then, if one could be a
billionnaire.--"Antoine, I am going to have twenty people to dine
to-day."  "Biens, Madame."  Not a word or thought more about it, but get
home in season to dress, and come down to your own table, one of your own
guests.--"Giuseppe, we are to have a party a week from to-night,--five
hundred invitations--there is the list."  The day comes. "Madam, do you
remember you have your party tonight?"  "Why, so I have!  Everything
right? supper and all?"  "All as it should be, Madam."

"Send up Victorine."  "Victorine, full toilet for this evening,--pink,
diamonds, and emeralds.  Coiffeur at seven.  Allez."--Billionism, or
even millionism, must be a blessed kind of state, with health and clear
conscience and youth and good looks,--but most blessed is this, that it
takes off all the mean cares which give people the three wrinkles between
the eyebrows, and leaves them free to have a good time and make others
have a good time, all the way along from the charity that tips up
unexpected loads of wood before widows' houses, and leaves foundling
turkeys upon poor men's door-steps, and sets lean clergymen crying at the
sight of anonymous fifty-dollar bills, to the taste which orders a
perfect banquet in such sweet accord with every sense that everybody's
nature flowers out full--blown in its golden--glowing, fragrant
atmosphere.

--A great party given by the smaller gentry of the interior is a kind of
solemnity, so to speak.  It involves so much labor and anxiety,--its
spasmodic splendors are so violently contrasted with the homeliness of
every-day family-life,--it is such a formidable matter to break in the
raw subordinates to the manege of the cloak-room and the table,--there is
such a terrible uncertainty in the results of unfamiliar culinary
operations,--so many feuds are involved in drawing that fatal line which
divides the invited from the uninvited fraction of the local
universe,--that, if the notes requested the pleasure of the guests'
company on "this solemn occasion," they would pretty nearly express the
true state of things.

The Colonel himself had been pressed into the service.  He had pounded
something in the great mortar.  He had agitated a quantity of sweetened
and thickened milk in what was called a cream-freezer.  At eleven
o'clock, A. M., he retired for a space.  On returning, his color was
noted to be somewhat heightened, and he showed a disposition to be
jocular with the female help,--which tendency, displaying itself in
livelier demonstrations than were approved at head-quarters, led to his
being detailed to out-of-door duties, such as raking gravel, arranging
places for horses to be hitched to, and assisting in the construction of
an arch of wintergreen at the porch of the mansion.

A whiff from Mr. Geordie's cigar refreshed the toiling females from time
to time; for the windows had to be opened occasionally, while all these
operations were going on, and the youth amused himself with inspecting
the interior, encouraging the operatives now and then in the phrases
commonly employed by genteel young men,--for he had perused an odd volume
of "Verdant Green," and was acquainted with a Sophomore from one of the
fresh-water colleges.  "Go it on the feed!" exclaimed this spirited young
man.  "Nothin' like a good spread. Grub enough and good liquor, that's
the ticket.  Guv'nor'll do the heavy polite, and let me alone for
polishin' off the young charmers." And Mr. Geordie looked expressively at
a handmaid who was rolling gingerbread, as if he were rehearsing for "Don
Giovanni."

Evening came at last, and the ladies were forced to leave the scene of
their labors to array themselves for the coming festivities.  The tables
had been set in a back room, the meats were ready, the pickles were
displayed, the cake was baked, the blanc-mange had stiffened, and the
ice-cream had frozen.

At half past seven o'clock, the Colonel, in costume, came into the front
parlor, and proceeded to light the lamps.  Some were good-humored enough
and took the hint of a lighted match at once.  Others were as vicious as
they could be,--would not light on any terms, any more than if they were
filled with water, or lighted and smoked one side of the chimney, or
spattered a few sparks and sulked themselves out, or kept up a faint show
of burning, so that their ground glasses looked as feebly phosphorescent
as so many invalid fireflies.  With much coaxing and screwing and
pricking, a tolerable illumination was at last achieved.  At eight there
was a grand rustling of silks, and Mrs. and Miss Sprowle descended from
their respective bowers or boudoirs.  Of course they were pretty well
tired by this time, and very glad to sit down,--having the prospect
before them of being obliged to stand for hours.  The Colonel walked
about the parlor, inspecting his regiment of lamps.  By and by Mr.
Geordie entered.

"Mph! mph!"  he sniffed, as he came in.  "You smell of lamp-smoke here."

That always galls people,--to have a new-comer accuse them of smoke or
close air, which they have got used to and do not perceive.  The Colonel
raged at the thought of his lamps' smoking, and tongued a few anathemas
inside of his shut teeth, but turned down two or three wicks that burned
higher than the rest.

Master H. Frederic next made his appearance, with questionable marks upon
his fingers and countenance.  Had been tampering with something brown and
sticky.  His elder brother grew playful, and caught him by the baggy
reverse of his more essential garment.

"Hush!" said Mrs. Sprowle,--"there 's the bell!"

Everybody took position at once, and began to look very smiling and
altogether at ease.--False alarm.  Only a parcel of spoons,--"loaned,"
as the inland folks say when they mean lent, by a neighbor.

"Better late than never!" said the Colonel, "let me heft them spoons."

Mrs. Sprowle came down into her chair again as if all her bones had been
bewitched out of her.

"I'm pretty nigh beat out a'ready," said she, "before any of the folks
has come."

They sat silent awhile, waiting for the first arrival.  How nervous they
got! and how their senses were sharpened!

"Hark!"  said Miss Matilda,--"what 's that rumblin'?"

It was a cart going over a bridge more than a mile off, which at any
other time they would not have heard.  After this there was a lull, and
poor Mrs. Sprowle's head nodded once or twice.  Presently a crackling and
grinding of gravel;--how much that means, when we are waiting for those
whom we long or dread to see!  Then a change in the tone of the
gravel-crackling.

"Yes, they have turned in at our gate.  They're comin'!  Mother! mother!"

Everybody in position, smiling and at ease.  Bell rings.  Enter the first
set of visitors.  The Event of the Season has begun.

"Law! it's nothin' but the Cranes' folks!  I do believe Mahala 's come in
that old green de-laine she wore at the Surprise Party!"

Miss Matilda had peeped through a crack of the door and made this
observation and the remark founded thereon.  Continuing her attitude of
attention, she overheard Mrs. Crane and her two daughters conversing in
the attiring-room, up one flight.

"How fine everything is in the great house!"  said Mrs. Crane,--"jest
look at the picters!"

"Matildy Sprowle's drawin's," said Ada Azuba, the eldest daughter.

"I should think so," said Mahala Crane, her younger sister,--a wide-awake
girl, who had n't been to school for nothing, and performed a little on
the lead pencil herself.  "I should like to know whether that's a
hay-cock or a mountain!"

Miss Matilda winced; for this must refer to her favorite monochrome,
executed by laying on heavy shadows and stumping them down into mellow
harmony,--the style of drawing which is taught in six lessons, and the
kind of specimen which is executed in something less than one hour.
Parents and other very near relatives are sometimes gratified with these
productions, and cause them to be framed and hung up, as in the present
instance.

"I guess we won't go down jest yet," said Mrs. Crane, "as folks don't
seem to have come."

So she began a systematic inspection of the dressing-room and its
conveniences.

"Mahogany four-poster;--come from the Jordans', I cal'la,te. Marseilles
quilt.  Ruffles all round the piller.  Chintz curtings,--jest put
up,--o' purpose for the party, I'll lay ye a dollar.--What a nice
washbowl!" (Taps it with a white knuckle belonging to a red finger.)
"Stone chaney.--Here's a bran'-new brush and comb,--and here's a
scent-bottle.  Come here, girls, and fix yourselves in the glass, and
scent your pocket-handkerchers."

And Mrs. Crane bedewed her own kerchief with some of the eau de Cologne
of native manufacture,--said on its label to be much superior to the
German article.

It was a relief to Mrs. and the Miss Cranes when the bell rang and the
next guests were admitted.  Deacon and Mrs. Soper,--Deacon Soper of the
Rev. Mr. Fairweather's church, and his lady.  Mrs. Deacon Soper was
directed, of course, to the ladies' dressing-room, and her husband to the
other apartment, where gentlemen were to leave their outside coats and
hats.  Then came Mr. and Mrs. Briggs, and then the three Miss Spinneys,
then Silas Peckham, Head of the Apollinean Institute, and Mrs. Peckham,
and more after them, until at last the ladies' dressing-room got so full
that one might have thought it was a trap none of them could get out of.
In truth, they all felt a little awkwardly.  Nobody wanted to be first to
venture down-stairs. At last Mr. Silas Peckham thought it was time to
make a move for the parlor, and for this purpose presented himself at the
door of the ladies' dressing-room.

"Lorindy, my dear!"  he exclaimed to Mrs. Peckham,--"I think there can be
no impropriety in our joining the family down-stairs."

Mrs. Peckham laid her large, flaccid arm in the sharp angle made by the
black sleeve which held the bony limb her husband offered, and the two
took the stair and struck out for the parlor.  The ice was broken, and
the dressing-room began to empty itself into the spacious, lighted
apartments below.

Mr. Silas Peckham slid into the room with Mrs. Peckham alongside, like a
shad convoying a jelly-fish.

"Good-evenin', Mrs. Sprowle!  I hope I see you well this evenin'. How 's
your haalth, Colonel Sprowle?"

"Very well, much obleeged to you.  Hope you and your good lady are well.
Much pleased to see you.  Hope you'll enjoy yourselves.  We've laid out
to have everything in good shape,--spared no trouble nor ex"--

"pence,"--said Silas Peckham.

Mrs. Colonel Sprowle, who, you remember, was a Jordan, had nipped the
Colonel's statement in the middle of the word Mr. Peckham finished, with
a look that jerked him like one of those sharp twitches women keep giving
a horse when they get a chance to drive one.

Mr. and Mrs. Crane, Miss Ada Azuba, and Miss Mahala Crane made their
entrance.  There had been a discussion about the necessity and propriety
of inviting this family, the head of which kept a small shop for hats and
boots and shoes.  The Colonel's casting vote had carried it in the
affirmative.--How terribly the poor old green de-laine did cut up in the
blaze of so many lamps and candles.

--Deluded little wretch, male or female, in town or country, going to
your first great party, how little you know the nature of the ceremony in
which you are to bear the part of victim!  What! are not these garlands
and gauzy mists and many-colored streamers which adorn you, is not this
music which welcomes you, this radiance that glows about you, meant
solely for your enjoyment, young miss of seventeen or eighteen summers,
now for the first time swimming unto the frothy, chatoyant, sparkling,
undulating sea of laces and silks and satins, and white-armed,
flower-crowned maidens struggling in their waves beneath the lustres that
make the false summer of the drawing-room?

Stop at the threshold!  This is a hall of judgment you are entering; the
court is in session; and if you move five steps forward, you will be at
its bar.

There was a tribunal once in France, as you may remember, called the
Chambre Ardente, the Burning Chamber.  It was hung all round with lamps,
and hence its name.  The burning chamber for the trial of young maidens
is the blazing ball-room.  What have they full-dressed you, or rather
half-dressed you for, do you think?  To make you look pretty, of course!
Why have they hung a chandelier above you, flickering all over with
flames, so that it searches you like the noonday sun, and your deepest
dimple cannot hold a shadow?  To give brilliancy to the gay scene, no
doubt!--No, my clear!  Society is inspecting you, and it finds
undisguised surfaces and strong lights a convenience in the process.  The
dance answers the purpose of the revolving pedestal upon which the "White
Captive" turns, to show us the soft, kneaded marble, which looks as if it
had never been hard, in all its manifold aspects of living loveliness.
No mercy for you, my love!  Justice, strict justice, you shall certainly
have,--neither more nor less.  For, look you, there are dozens, scores,
hundreds, with whom you must be weighed in the balance; and you have got
to learn that the "struggle for life" Mr. Charles Darwin talks about
reaches to vertebrates clad in crinoline, as well as to mollusks in
shells, or articulates in jointed scales, or anything that fights for
breathing-room and food and love in any coat of fur or feather! Happy
they who can flash defiance from bright eyes and snowy shoulders back
into the pendants of the insolent lustres!

--Miss Mahala Crane did not have these reflections; and no young girl
ever did, or ever will, thank Heaven!  Her keen eyes sparkled under her
plainly parted hair and the green de-laine moulded itself in those
unmistakable lines of natural symmetry in which Nature indulges a small
shopkeeper's daughter occasionally as well as a wholesale dealer's young
ladies.  She would have liked a new dress as much as any other girl, but
she meant to go and have a good time at any rate.

The guests were now arriving in the drawing-room pretty fast, and the
Colonel's hand began to burn a good deal with the sharp squeezes which
many of the visitors gave it.  Conversation, which had begun like a
summer-shower, in scattering drops, was fast becoming continuous, and
occasionally rising into gusty swells, with now and then a broad-chested
laugh from some Captain or Major or other military personage,--for it may
be noted that all large and loud men in the unpaved districts bear
military titles.

Deacon Soper came up presently, and entered into conversation with
Colonel Sprowle.

"I hope to see our pastor present this evenin'," said the Deacon.

"I don't feel quite sure," the Colonel answered.  "His dyspepsy has been
bad on him lately.  He wrote to say, that, Providence permittin', it
would be agreeable to him to take a part in the exercises of the evenin';
but I mistrusted he did n't mean to come. To tell the truth, Deacon
Soper, I rather guess he don't like the idee of dancin', and some of the
other little arrangements."

"Well," said the Deacon, "I know there's some condemns dancin'.  I've
heerd a good deal of talk about it among the folks round.  Some have it
that it never brings a blessin' on a house to have dancin' in it. Judge
Tileston died, you remember, within a month after he had his great ball,
twelve year ago, and some thought it was in the natur' of a judgment.  I
don't believe in any of them notions.  If a man happened to be struck
dead the night after he'd been givin' a ball," (the Colonel loosened his
black stock a little, and winked and swallowed two or three times,) "I
should n't call it a judgment,--I should call it a coincidence.  But I 'm
a little afraid our pastor won't come.  Somethin' or other's the matter
with Mr. Fairweather.  I should sooner expect to see the old Doctor come
over out of the Orthodox parsonage-house."

"I've asked him," said the Colonel.

"Well?"  said Deacon Soper.

"He said he should like to come, but he did n't know what his people
would say.  For his part, he loved to see young folks havin' their sports
together, and very often felt as if he should like to be one of 'em
himself.  'But,' says I, 'Doctor, I don't say there won't be a little
dancin'.'  'Don't!' says he, 'for I want Letty to go,' (she's his
granddaughter that's been stayin' with him,) 'and Letty 's mighty fond of
dancin'.  You know,' says the Doctor, 'it is n't my business to settle
whether other people's children should dance or not.'  And the Doctor
looked as if he should like to rigadoon and sashy across as well as the
young one he was talkin' about.  He 's got blood in him, the old Doctor
has.  I wish our little man and him would swop pulpits."

Deacon Soper started and looked up into the Colonel's face, as if to see
whether he was in earnest.

Mr. Silas Peckham and his lady joined the group.

"Is this to be a Temperance Celebration, Mrs. Sprowle?" asked Mr. Silas
Peckham.

Mrs. Sprowle replied, "that there would be lemonade and srub for those
that preferred such drinks, but that the Colonel had given folks to
understand that he did n't mean to set in judgment on the marriage in
Canaan, and that those that didn't like srub and such things would find
somethin' that would suit them better."

Deacon Soper's countenance assumed a certain air of restrained
cheerfulness.  The conversation rose into one of its gusty paroxysms just
then.  Master H. Frederic got behind a door and began performing the
experiment of stopping and unstopping his ears in rapid alternation,
greatly rejoicing in the singular effect of mixed conversation chopped
very small, like the contents of a mince-pie, or meat-pie, as it is more
forcibly called in the deep-rutted villages lying along the unsalted
streams.  All at once it grew silent just round the door, where it had
been loudest,--and the silence spread itself like a stain, till it hushed
everything but a few corner-duets.  A dark, sad-looking, middle-aged
gentleman entered the parlor, with a young lady on his arm,--his
daughter, as it seemed, for she was not wholly unlike him in feature, and
of the same dark complexion.

"Dudley Venner," exclaimed a dozen people, in startled, but
half-suppressed tones.

"What can have brought Dudley out to-night?" said Jefferson Buck, a young
fellow, who had been interrupted in one of the corner-duets which he was
executing in concert with Miss Susy Pettingill.

"How do I know, Jeff?"  was Miss Susy's answer.  Then, after a
pause,--"Elsie made him come, I guess.  Go ask Dr. Kittredge; he knows
all about 'em both, they say."

Dr. Kittredge, the leading physician of Rockland, was a shrewd old man,
who looked pretty keenly into his patients through his spectacles, and
pretty widely at men, women, and things in general over them.
Sixty-three years old,--just the year of the grand climacteric.  A bald
crown, as every doctor should have.  A consulting practitioner's mouth;
that is, movable round the corners while the case is under examination,
but both corners well drawn down and kept so when the final opinion is
made up.  In fact, the Doctor was often sent for to act as "caounsel,"
all over the county, and beyond it.  He kept three or four horses,
sometimes riding in the saddle, commonly driving in a sulky, pretty fast,
and looking straight before him, so that people got out of the way of
bowing to him as he passed on the road.  There was some talk about his
not being so long-sighted as other folks, but his old patients laughed
and looked knowing when this was spoken of.

The Doctor knew a good many things besides how to drop tinctures and
shake out powders.  Thus, he knew a horse, and, what is harder to
understand, a horse-dealer, and was a match for him.  He knew what a
nervous woman is, and how to manage her.  He could tell at a glance when
she is in that condition of unstable equilibrium in which a rough word is
like a blow to her, and the touch of unmagnetized fingers reverses all
her nervous currents.  It is not everybody that enters into the soul of
Mozart's or Beethoven's harmonies; and there are vital symphonies in B
flat, and other low, sad keys, which a doctor may know as little of as a
hurdy-gurdy player of the essence of those divine musical mysteries.  The
Doctor knew the difference between what men say and what they mean as
well as most people.  When he was listening to common talk, he was in the
habit of looking over his spectacles; if he lifted his head so as to look
through them at the person talking, he was busier with that person's
thoughts than with his words.

Jefferson Buck was not bold enough to confront the Doctor with Miss
Susy's question, for he did not look as if he were in the mood to answer
queries put by curious young people.  His eyes were fixed steadily on the
dark girl, every movement of whom he seemed to follow.

She was, indeed, an apparition of wild beauty, so unlike the girls about
her that it seemed nothing more than natural, that, when she moved, the
groups should part to let her pass through them, and that she should
carry the centre of all looks and thoughts with her.  She was dressed to
please her own fancy, evidently, with small regard to the modes declared
correct by the Rockland milliners and mantua-makers.  Her heavy black
hair lay in a braided coil, with a long gold pin shat through it like a
javelin.  Round her neck was a golden torque, a round, cord-like chain,
such as the Gaols used to wear; the "Dying Gladiator" has it.  Her dress
was a grayish watered silk; her collar was pinned with a flashing diamond
brooch, the stones looking as fresh as morning dew-drops, but the silver
setting of the past generation; her arms were bare, round, but slender
rather than large, in keeping with her lithe round figure.  On her wrists
she wore bracelets: one was a circlet of enamelled scales; the other
looked as if it might have been Cleopatra's asp, with its body turned to
gold and its, eyes to emeralds.

Her father--for Dudley Venner was her father--looked like a man of
culture and breeding, but melancholy and with a distracted air, as one
whose life had met some fatal cross or blight.  He saluted hardly anybody
except his entertainers and the Doctor.  One would have said, to look at
him, that he was not at the party by choice; and it was natural enough to
think, with Susy Pettingill, that it must have been a freak of the dark
girl's which brought him there, for he had the air of a shy and
sad-hearted recluse.

It was hard to say what could have brought Elsie Venner to the party.
Hardly anybody seemed to know her, and she seemed not at all disposed to
make acquaintances.  Here and there was one of the older girls from the
Institute, but she appeared to have nothing in common with them.  Even in
the schoolroom, it may be remembered, she sat apart by her own choice,
and now in the midst of the crowd she made a circle of isolation round
herself.  Drawing her arm out of her father's, she stood against the
wall, and looked, with a strange, cold glitter in her eyes, at the crowd
which moved and babbled before her.

The old Doctor came up to her by and by.

"Well, Elsie, I am quite surprised to find you here.  Do tell me how you
happened to do such a good-natured thing as to let us see you at such a
great party."

"It's been dull at the mansion-house," she said, "and I wanted to get out
of it.  It's too lonely there,--there's nobody to hate since Dick's
gone."

The Doctor laughed good-naturedly, as if this were an amusing bit of
pleasantry,--but he lifted his head and dropped his eyes a little, so as
to see her through his spectacles.  She narrowed her lids slightly, as
one often sees a sleepy cat narrow hers,--somewhat as you may remember
our famous Margaret used to, if you remember her at all,--so that her
eyes looked very small, but bright as the diamonds on her breast.  The
old Doctor felt very oddly as she looked at him; be did not like the
feeling, so he dropped his head and lifted his eyes and looked at her
over his spectacles again.

"And how have you all been at the mansion house?" said the Doctor.

"Oh, well enough.  But Dick's gone, and there's nobody left but Dudley
and I and the people.  I'm tired of it.  What kills anybody quickest,
Doctor?"  Then, in a whisper, "I ran away again the other day, you know."

"Where did you go?"  The Doctor spoke in a low, serious tone.

"Oh, to the old place.  Here, I brought this for you."

The Doctor started as she handed him a flower of the Atragene Americana,
for he knew that there was only one spot where it grew, and that not one
where any rash foot, least of all a thin-shod woman's foot, should
venture.

"How long were you gone?" said the Doctor.

"Only one night.  You should have heard the horns blowing and the guns
firing.  Dudley was frightened out of his wits.  Old Sophy told him she'd
had a dream, and that I should be found in Dead-Man's Hollow, with a
great rock lying on me.  They hunted all over it, but they did n't find
me,--I was farther up."

Doctor Kittredge looked cloudy and worried while she was speaking, but
forced a pleasant professional smile, as he said cheerily, and as if
wishing to change the subject,

"Have a good dance this evening, Elsie.  The fiddlers are tuning up.
Where 's the young master? has he come yet? or is he going to be late,
with the other great folks?"

The girl turned away without answering, and looked toward the door.

The "great folks," meaning the mansion-house gentry, were just beginning
to come; Dudley Venner and his daughter had been the first of them.
Judge Thornton, white-headed, fresh-faced, as good at sixty as he was at
forty, with a youngish second wife, and one noble daughter, Arabella,
who, they said, knew as much law as her father, a stately, Portia like
girl, fit for a premier's wife, not like to find her match even in the
great cities she sometimes visited; the Trecothicks, the family of a
merchant, (in the larger sense,) who, having made himself rich enough by
the time he had reached middle life, threw down his ledger as Sylla did
his dagger, and retired to make a little paradise around him in one of
the stateliest residences of the town, a family inheritance; the
Vaughans, an old Rockland race, descended from its first settlers,
Toryish in tendency in Revolutionary times, and barely escaping
confiscation or worse; the Dunhams, a new family, dating its gentility
only as far back as the Honorable Washington Dunham, M. C., but turning
out a clever boy or two that went to college; and some showy girls with
white necks and fat arms who had picked up professional husbands: these
were the principal mansion-house people.  All of them had made it a point
to come; and as each of them entered, it seemed to Colonel and Mrs.
Sprowle that the lamps burned up with a more cheerful light, and that the
fiddles which sounded from the uncarpeted room were all half a tone
higher and half a beat quicker.

Mr. Bernard came in later than any of them; he had been busy with his new
duties.  He looked well and that is saying a good deal; for nothing but a
gentleman is endurable in full dress.  Hair that masses well, a head set
on with an air, a neckerchief tied cleverly by an easy, practised hand,
close-fitting gloves, feet well shaped and well covered,--these
advantages can make us forgive the odious sable broadcloth suit, which
appears to have been adopted by society on the same principle that
condemned all the Venetian gondolas to perpetual and uniform blackness.
Mr. Bernard, introduced by Mr. Geordie, made his bow to the Colonel and
his lady and to Miss Matilda, from whom he got a particularly gracious
curtsy, and then began looking about him for acquaintances.  He found two
or three faces he knew,--many more strangers.  There was Silas
Peckham,--there was no mistaking him; there was the inelastic amplitude
of Mrs. Peckham; few of the Apollinean girls, of course, they not being
recognized members of society,--but there is one with the flame in her
cheeks and the fire in her eyes, the girl of vigorous tints and emphatic
outlines, whom we saw entering the schoolroom the other day.  Old Judge
Thornton has his eyes on her, and the Colonel steals a look every now and
then at the red brooch which lifts itself so superbly into the light, as
if he thought it a wonderfully becoming ornament.  Mr. Bernard himself
was not displeased with the general effect of the rich-blooded
schoolgirl, as she stood under the bright lamps, fanning herself in the
warm, languid air, fixed in a kind of passionate surprise at the new life
which seemed to be flowering out in her consciousness. Perhaps he looked
at her somewhat steadily, as some others had done; at any rate, she
seemed to feel that she was looked at, as people often do, and, turning
her eyes suddenly on him, caught his own on her face, gave him a
half-bashful smile, and threw in a blush involuntarily which made it more
charming.

"What can I do better," he said to himself, "than have a dance with Rosa
Milburn?"  So he carried his handsome pupil into the next room and took
his place with her in a cotillon.  Whether the breath of the Goddess of
Love could intoxicate like the cup of Circe,--whether a woman is ever
phosphorescent with the luminous vapor of life that she exhales,--these
and other questions which relate to occult influences exercised by
certain women we will not now discuss.  It is enough that Mr. Bernard was
sensible of a strange fascination, not wholly new to him, nor
unprecedented in the history of human experience, but always a revelation
when it comes over us for the first or the hundredth time, so pale is the
most recent memory by the side of the passing moment with the flush of
any new-born passion on its cheek. Remember that Nature makes every man
love all women, and trusts the trivial matter of special choice to the
commonest accident.

If Mr. Bernard had had nothing to distract his attention, he might have
thought too much about his handsome partner, and then gone home and
dreamed about her, which is always dangerous, and waked up thinking of
her still, and then begun to be deeply interested in her studies, and so
on, through the whole syllogism which ends in Nature's supreme quod erat
demonstrandum.  What was there to distract him or disturb him?  He did
not know,--but there was something.  This sumptuous creature, this Eve
just within the gate of an untried Paradise, untutored in the ways of the
world, but on tiptoe to reach the fruit of the tree of knowledge,--alive
to the moist vitality of that warm atmosphere palpitating with voices and
music, as the flower of some dioecious plant which has grown in a lone
corner and suddenly unfolding its corolla on some hot-breathing June
evening, feels that the air is perfumed with strange odors and loaded
with golden dust wafted from those other blossoms with which its double
life is shared,--this almost over-womanized woman might well have
bewitched him, but that he had a vague sense of a counter-charm.  It was,
perhaps, only the same consciousness that some one was looking at him
which he himself had just given occasion to in his partner. Presently, in
one of the turns of the dance, he felt his eyes drawn to a figure he had
not distinctly recognized, though he had dimly felt its presence, and saw
that Elsie Venner was looking at him as if she saw nothing else but him.
He was not a nervous person, like the poor lady-teacher, yet the glitter
of the diamond eyes affected him strangely.  It seemed to disenchant the
air, so full a moment before of strange attractions.  He became silent,
and dreamy, as it were. The round-limbed beauty at his side crushed her
gauzy draperies against him, as they trod the figure of the dance
together, but it was no more to him than if an old nurse had laid her
hand on his sleeve.  The young girl chafed at his seeming neglect, and
her imperious blood mounted into her cheeks; but he appeared unconscious
of it.

"There is one of our young ladies I must speak to," he said,--and was
just leaving his partner's side.

"Four hands all round?" shouted the first violin,--and Mr. Bernard found
himself seized and whirled in a circle out of which he could not escape,
and then forced to "cross over," and then to "dozy do," as the maestro
had it,--and when, on getting back to his place, he looked for Elsie
Venner, she was gone.

The dancing went on briskly.  Some of the old folks looked on, others
conversed in groups and pairs, and so the evening wore along, until a
little after ten o'clock.  About this time there was noticed an increased
bustle in the passages, with a considerable opening and shutting of
doors.  Presently it began to be whispered about that they were going to
have supper.  Many, who had never been to any large party before, held
their breath for a moment at this announcement.  It was rather with a
tremulous interest than with open hilarity that the rumor was generally
received.

One point the Colonel had entirely forgotten to settle.  It was a point
involving not merely propriety, but perhaps principle also, or at least
the good report of the house,--and he had never thought to arrange it.
He took Judge Thornton aside and whispered the important question to
him,--in his distress of mind, mistaking pockets and taking out his
bandanna instead of his white handkerchief to wipe his forehead.

"Judge," he said, "do you think, that, before we commence refreshing
ourselves at the tables, it would be the proper thing to--crave a--to
request Deacon Soper or some other elderly person--to ask a blessing?"

The Judge looked as grave as if he were about giving the opinion of the
Court in the great India-rubber case.

"On the whole," he answered, after a pause, "I should think it might,
perhaps, be dispensed with on this occasion.  Young folks are noisy, and
it is awkward to have talking and laughing going on while blessing is
being asked.  Unless a clergyman is present and makes a point of it, I
think it will hardly be expected."

The Colonel was infinitely relieved.  "Judge, will you take Mrs. Sprowle
in to supper?"  And the Colonel returned the compliment by offering his
arm to Mrs. Judge Thornton.

The door of the supper-room was now open, and the company, following the
lead of the host and hostess, began to stream into it, until it was
pretty well filled.

There was an awful kind of pause.  Many were beginning to drop their
heads and shut their eyes, in anticipation of the usual petition before a
meal; some expected the music to strike up,--others, that an oration
would now be delivered by the Colonel.

"Make yourselves at home, ladies and gentlemen," said the Colonel; "good
things were made to eat, and you're welcome to all you see before you."

So saying he attacked a huge turkey which stood at the head of the table;
and his example being followed first by the bold, then by the doubtful,
and lastly by the timid, the clatter soon made the circuit of the tables.
Some were shocked, however, as the Colonel had feared they would be, at
the want of the customary invocation.  Widow Leech, a kind of relation,
who had to be invited, and who came with her old, back-country-looking
string of gold beads round her neck, seemed to feel very serious about
it.

"If she'd ha' known that folks would begrutch cravin' a blessin' over
sech a heap o' provisions, she'd rather ha' staid t' home.  It was a bad
sign, when folks was n't grateful for the baounties of Providence."

The elder Miss Spinney, to whom she made this remark, assented to it, at
the same time ogling a piece of frosted cake, which she presently
appropriated with great refinement of manner,--taking it between her
thumb and forefinger, keeping the others well spread and the little
finger in extreme divergence, with a graceful undulation of the neck, and
a queer little sound in her throat, as of an M that wanted to get out and
perished in the attempt.

The tables now presented an animated spectacle.  Young fellows of the
more dashing sort, with high stand-up collars and voluminous bows to
their neckerchiefs, distinguished themselves by cutting up fowls and
offering portions thereof to the buxom girls these knowing ones had
commonly selected.

"A bit of the wing, Roxy, or of the--under limb?"

The first laugh broke out at this, but it was premature, a sporadic
laugh, as Dr. Kittredge would have said, which did not become epidemic.
People were very solemn as yet, many of them being new to such splendid
scenes, and crushed, as it were, in the presence of so much crockery and
so many silver spoons, and such a variety of unusual viands and
beverages.  When the laugh rose around Roxy and her saucy beau, several
looked in that direction with an anxious expression, as if something had
happened, a lady fainted, for instance, or a couple of lively fellows
come to high words.

"Young folks will be young folks," said Deacon Soper.  "No harm done.
Least said soonest mended."

"Have some of these shell-oysters?"  said the Colonel to Mrs. Trecothick.

A delicate emphasis on the word shell implied that the Colonel knew what
was what.  To the New England inland native, beyond the reach of the east
winds, the oyster unconditioned, the oyster absolute, without a
qualifying adjective, is the pickled oyster.  Mrs. Trecothick, who knew
very well that an oyster long out of his shell (as is apt to be the case
with the rural bivalve) gets homesick and loses his sprightliness,
replied, with the pleasantest smile in the world, that the chicken she
had been helped to was too delicate to be given up even for the greater
rarity.  But the word "shell-oysters" had been overheard; and there was a
perceptible crowding movement towards their newly discovered habitat, a
large soup-tureen.

Silas Peckham had meantime fallen upon another locality of these recent
mollusks.  He said nothing, but helped himself freely, and made a sign to
Mrs. Peckham.

"Lorindy," he whispered, "shell-oysters"

And ladled them out to her largely, without betraying any emotion, just
as if they had been the natural inland or pickled article.

After the more solid portion of the banquet had been duly honored, the
cakes and sweet preparations of various kinds began to get their share of
attention.  There were great cakes and little cakes, cakes with raisins
in them, cakes with currants, and cakes without either; there were brown
cakes and yellow cakes, frosted cakes, glazed cakes, hearts and rounds,
and jumbles, which playful youth slip over the forefinger before spoiling
their annular outline.  There were mounds of blo'monje, of the arrowroot
variety,--that being undistinguishable from such as is made with Russia
isinglass.  There were jellies, which had been shaking, all the time the
young folks were dancing in the next room, as if they were balancing to
partners.  There were built-up fabrics, called Charlottes, caky
externally, pulpy within; there were also marangs, and likewise
custards,--some of the indolent-fluid sort, others firm, in which every
stroke of the teaspoon left a smooth, conchoidal surface like the
fracture of chalcedony, with here and there a little eye like what one
sees in cheeses.  Nor was that most wonderful object of domestic art
called trifle wanting, with its charming confusion of cream and cake and
almonds and jam and jelly and wine and cinnamon and froth; nor yet the
marvellous floating-island,--name suggestive of all that is romantic in
the imaginations of youthful palates.

"It must have cost you a sight of work, to say nothin' of money, to get
all this beautiful confectionery made for the party," said Mrs. Crane to
Mrs. Sprowle.

"Well, it cost some consid'able labor, no doubt," said Mrs. Sprowle.
"Matilda and our girls and I made 'most all the cake with our own hands,
and we all feel some tired; but if folks get what suits 'em, we don't
begrudge the time nor the work.  But I do feel thirsty," said the poor
lady, "and I think a glass of srub would do my throat good; it's dreadful
dry.  Mr. Peckham, would you be so polite as to pass me a glass of srub?"

Silas Peckham bowed with great alacrity, and took from the table a small
glass cup, containing a fluid reddish in hue and subacid in taste.  This
was srub, a beverage in local repute, of questionable nature, but
suspected of owing its tint and sharpness to some kind of syrup derived
from the maroon-colored fruit of the sumac.  There were similar small
cups on the table filled with lemonade, and here and there a decanter of
Madeira wine, of the Marsala kind, which some prefer to, and many more
cannot distinguish from, that which comes from the Atlantic island.

"Take a glass of wine, Judge," said, the Colonel; "here is an article
that I rather think 'll suit you."

The Judge knew something of wines, and could tell all the famous old
Madeiras from each other, "Eclipse," "Juno," the almost fabulously scarce
and precious "White-top," and the rest.  He struck the nativity of the
Mediterranean Madeira before it had fairly moistened his lip.

"A sound wine, Colonel, and I should think of a genuine vintage. Your
very good health."

"Deacon Soper," said the Colonel, "here is some Madary Judge Thornton
recommends.  Let me fill you a glass of it."

The Deacon's eyes glistened.  He was one of those consistent Christians
who stick firmly by the first miracle and Paul's advice to Timothy.

"A little good wine won't hurt anybody," said the Deacon.  "Plenty,
--plenty,--plenty.  There!"  He had not withdrawn his glass, while the
Colonel was pouring, for fear it should spill, and now it was running
over.

--It is very odd how all a man's philosophy and theology are at the mercy
of a few drops of a fluid which the chemists say consists of nothing but
C4, O2, H6.  The Deacon's theology fell off several points towards
latitudinarianism in the course of the next ten minutes.  He had a deep
inward sense that everything was as it should be, human nature included.
The little accidents of humanity, known collectively to moralists as sin,
looked very venial to his growing sense of universal brotherhood and
benevolence.

"It will all come right," the Deacon said to himself,--"I feel a joyful
conviction that everything is for the best.  I am favored with a blessed
peace of mind, and a very precious season of good feelin' toward my
fellow-creturs."

A lusty young fellow happened to make a quick step backward just at that
instant, and put his heel, with his weight on top of it, upon the
Deacon's toes.

"Aigh!  What the d' d' didos are y' abaout with them great huffs o'
yourn?" said the Deacon, with an expression upon his features not exactly
that of peace and good-will to men.  The lusty young fellow apologized;
but the Deacon's face did not come right, and his theology backed round
several points in the direction of total depravity.

Some of the dashing young men in stand-up collars and extensive neckties,
encouraged by Mr. Geordie, made quite free with the "Ma,dary," and even
induced some of the more stylish girls--not of the mansion-house set, but
of the tip-top two-story families--to taste a little.  Most of these
young ladies made faces at it, and declared it was "perfectly horrid,"
with that aspect of veracity peculiar to their age and sex.

About this time a movement was made on the part of some of the
mansion-house people to leave the supper-table.  Miss Jane Trecothick had
quietly hinted to her mother that she had had enough of it.  Miss
Arabella Thornton had whispered to her father that he had better adjourn
this court to the next room.  There were signs of migration,--a
loosening of people in their places,--a looking about for arms to hitch
on to.

"Stop!"  said the Colonel.  "There's something coming yet.--Ice-cream!"

The great folks saw that the play was not over yet, and that it was only
polite to stay and see it out.  The word "ice-cream" was no sooner
whispered than it passed from one to another all down the tables.  The
effect was what might have been anticipated.  Many of the guests had
never seen this celebrated product of human skill, and to all the
two-story population of Rockland it was the last expression of the art of
pleasing and astonishing the human palate. Its appearance had been
deferred for several reasons: first, because everybody would have
attacked it, if it had come in with the other luxuries; secondly, because
undue apprehensions were entertained (owing to want of experience) of its
tendency to deliquesce and resolve itself with alarming rapidity into
puddles of creamy fluid; and, thirdly, because the surprise would make a
grand climax to finish off the banquet.

There is something so audacious in the conception of ice-cream, that it
is not strange that a population undebauched by the luxury of great
cities looks upon it with a kind of awe and speaks of it with a certain
emotion.  This defiance of the seasons, forcing Nature to do her work of
congelation in the face of her sultriest noon, might well inspire a timid
mind with fear lest human art were revolting against the Higher Powers,
and raise the same scruples which resisted the use of ether and
chloroform in certain contingencies.  Whatever may be the cause, it is
well known that the announcement at any private rural entertainment that
there is to be ice-cream produces an immediate and profound impression.
It may be remarked, as aiding this impression, that exaggerated ideas are
entertained as to the dangerous effects this congealed food may produce
on persons not in the most robust health.

There was silence as the pyramids of ice were placed on the table,
everybody looking on in admiration.  The Colonel took a knife and
assailed the one at the head of the table.  When he tried to cut off a
slice, it didn't seem to understand it, however, and only tipped, as if
it wanted to upset.  The Colonel attacked it on the other side, and it
tipped just as badly the other way.  It was awkward for the Colonel.
"Permit me," said the Judge,--and he took the knife and struck a sharp
slanting stroke which sliced off a piece just of the right size, and
offered it to Mrs. Sprowle.  This act of dexterity was much admired by
the company.

The tables were all alive again.

"Lorindy, here's a plate of ice-cream," said Silas Peckham.

"Come, Mahaly," said a fresh-looking young-fellow with a saucerful in
each hand, "here's your ice-cream;--let's go in the corner and have a
celebration, us two."  And the old green de-lame, with the young curves
under it to make it sit well, moved off as pleased apparently as if it
had been silk velvet with thousand-dollar laces over it.

"Oh, now, Miss Green! do you think it's safe to put that cold stuff into
your stomick?" said the Widow Leech to a young married lady, who, finding
the air rather warm, thought a little ice would cool her down very
nicely.  "It's jest like eatin' snowballs.  You don't look very rugged;
and I should be dreadful afeard, if I was you."

"Carrie," said old Dr. Kittredge, who had overheard this,--"how well
you're looking this evening!  But you must be tired and heated;--sit down
here, and let me give you a good slice of ice-cream.  How you young folks
do grow up, to be sure!  I don't feel quite certain whether it's you or
your older sister, but I know it 's somebody I call Carrie, and that I
've known ever since."

A sound something between a howl and an oath startled the company and
broke off the Doctor's sentence.  Everybody's eyes turned in the
direction from which it came.  A group instantly gathered round the
person who had uttered it, who was no other than Deacon Soper.

"He's chokin'! he's chokin'!" was the first exclamation,--"slap him on
the back!"

Several heavy fists beat such a tattoo on his spine that the Deacon felt
as if at least one of his vertebrae would come up.

"He's black in the face," said Widow Leech, "he 's swallered somethin'
the wrong way.  Where's the Doctor?--let the Doctor get to him, can't
ye?"

"If you will move, my good lady, perhaps I can," said Doctor Kittredge,
in a calm tone of voice.  "He's not choking, my friends," the Doctor
added immediately, when he got sight of him.

"It 's apoplexy,--I told you so,--don't you see how red he is in the
face?" said old Mrs. Peake, a famous woman for "nussin" sick folks,
--determined to be a little ahead of the Doctor.

"It's not apoplexy," said Dr. Kittredge.

"What is it, Doctor? what is it?  Will he die?  Is he dead?--Here's his
poor wife, the Widow Soper that is to be, if she a'n't a'ready"

"Do be quiet, my good woman," said Dr. Kittredge.--"Nothing serious, I
think, Mrs. Soper.  Deacon!"

The sudden attack of Deacon Soper had begun with the extraordinary sound
mentioned above.  His features had immediately assumed an expression of
intense pain, his eyes staring wildly, and, clapping his hands to his
face, he had rocked his head backward and forward in speechless agony.

At the Doctor's sharp appeal the Deacon lifted his head.

"It's all right," said the Doctor, as soon as he saw his face.  "The
Deacon had a smart attack of neuralgic pain.  That 's all.  Very severe,
but not at all dangerous."

The Doctor kept his countenance, but his diaphragm was shaking the change
in iris waistcoat-pockets with subterranean laughter.  He had looked
through his spectacles and seen at once what had happened. The Deacon,
not being in the habit of taking his nourishment in the congealed state,
had treated the ice-cream as a pudding of a rare species, and, to make
sure of doing himself justice in its distribution, had taken a large
mouthful of it without the least precaution.  The consequence was a
sensation as if a dentist were killing the nerves of twenty-five teeth at
once with hot irons, or cold ones, which would hurt rather worse.

The Deacon swallowed something with a spasmodic effort, and recovered
pretty soon and received the congratulations of his friends.  There were
different versions of the expressions he had used at the onset of his
complaint,--some of the reported exclamations involving a breach of
propriety, to say the least,--but it was agreed that a man in an attack
of neuralgy wasn't to be judged of by the rules that applied to other
folks.

The company soon after this retired from the supper-room.  The
mansion-house gentry took their leave, and the two-story people soon
followed.  Mr. Bernard had stayed an hour or two, and left soon after he
found that Elsie Venner and her father had disappeared.  As he passed by
the dormitory of the Institute, he saw a light glimmering from one of its
upper rooms, where the lady-teacher was still waking. His heart ached,
when he remembered, that, through all these hours of gayety, or what was
meant for it, the patient girl had been at work in her little chamber;
and he looked up at the silent stars, as if to see that they were
watching over her.  The planet Mars was burning like a red coal; the
northern constellation was slanting downward about its central point of
flame; and while he looked, a falling star slid from the zenith and was
lost.

He reached his chamber and was soon dreaming over the Event of the
Season.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE MORNING AFTER.

Colonel Sprowle's family arose late the next morning.  The fatigues and
excitements of the evening and the preparation for it were followed by a
natural collapse, of which somnolence was a leading symptom.  The sun
shone into the window at a pretty well opened angle when the Colonel
first found himself sufficiently awake to address his yet slumbering
spouse.

"Sally!"  said the Colonel, in a voice that was a little husky,--for he
had finished off the evening with an extra glass or two of "Madary," and
had a somewhat rusty and headachy sense of renewed existence, on greeting
the rather advanced dawn,--"Sally!"

"Take care o' them custard-cups!  There they go!"

Poor Mrs. Sprowle was fighting the party over in her dream; and as the
visionary custard-cups crashed down through one lobe of her brain into
another, she gave a start as if an inch of lightning from a quart Leyden
jar had jumped into one of her knuckles with its sudden and lively poonk!

"Sally!" said the Colonel,--"wake up, wake up.  What 'r' y' dreamin'
abaout?"

Mrs. Sprowle raised herself, by a sort of spasm, sur son seant, as they
say in France,--up on end, as we have it in New England.  She looked
first to the left, then to the right, then straight before her,
apparently without seeing anything, and at last slowly settled down, with
her two eyes, blank of any particular meaning, directed upon the Colonel.

"What time is 't?"  she said.

"Ten o'clock.  What y' been dreamin' abaout?  Y' giv a jump like a
hopper-grass.  Wake up, wake UP!  Th' party 's over, and y' been asleep
all the mornin'.  The party's over, I tell ye!  Wake up!"

"Over!"  said Mrs. Sprowle, who began to define her position at
last,--"over!  I should think 't was time 't was over!  It's lasted a
hundud year.  I've been workin' for that party longer 'n Methuselah's
lifetime, sence I been asleep.  The pies would n' bake, and the blo'monje
would n' set, and the ice-cream would n' freeze, and all the folks kep'
comin' 'n' comin' 'n' comin',--everybody I ever knew in all my
life,--some of 'em 's been dead this twenty year 'n' more,--'n' nothin'
for 'em to eat nor drink.  The fire would n' burn to cook anything, all
we could do.  We blowed with the belluses, 'n' we stuffed in paper 'n'
pitch-pine kindlin's, but nothin' could make that fire burn; 'n' all the
time the folks kep' comin', as if they'd never stop,--'n' nothin' for 'em
but empty dishes, 'n' all the borrowed chaney slippin' round on the
waiters 'n' chippin' 'n' crackin',--I would n' go through what I been
through t'-night for all th' money in th' Bank,--I do believe it's harder
t' have a party than t'"--

Mrs. Sprowle stated the case strongly.

The Colonel said he did n't know how that might be.  She was a better
judge than he was.  It was bother enough, anyhow, and he was glad that it
was over.  After this, the worthy pair commenced preparations for
rejoining the waking world, and in due time proceeded downstairs.

Everybody was late that morning, and nothing had got put to rights. The
house looked as if a small army had been quartered in it over night.  The
tables were of course in huge disorder, after the protracted assault they
had undergone.  There had been a great battle evidently, and it had gone
against the provisions.  Some points had been stormed, and all their
defences annihilated, but here and there were centres of resistance which
had held out against all attacks,--large rounds of beef, and solid
loaves of cake, against which the inexperienced had wasted their energies
in the enthusiasm of youth or uninformed maturity, while the
longer-headed guests were making discoveries of "shell-oysters" and
"patridges" and similar delicacies.

The breakfast was naturally of a somewhat fragmentary character.  A
chicken that had lost his legs in the service of the preceding campaign
was once more put on duty.  A great ham stuck with cloves, as Saint
Sebastian was with arrows, was again offered for martyrdom. It would have
been a pleasant sight for a medical man of a speculative turn to have
seen the prospect before the Colonel's family of the next week's
breakfasts, dinners, and suppers.  The trail that one of these great
rural parties leaves after it is one of its most formidable
considerations.  Every door-handle in the house is suggestive of
sweetmeats for the next week, at least.  The most unnatural articles of
diet displace the frugal but nutritious food of unconvulsed periods of
existence.  If there is a walking infant about the house, it will
certainly have a more or less fatal fit from overmuch of some
indigestible delicacy.  Before the week is out, everybody will be tired
to death of sugary forms of nourishment and long to see the last of the
remnants of the festival.

The family had not yet arrived at this condition.  On the contrary, the
first inspection of the tables suggested the prospect of days of
unstinted luxury; and the younger portion of the household, especially,
were in a state of great excitement as the account of stock was taken
with reference to future internal investments.  Some curious facts came
to light during these researches.

"Where's all the oranges gone to?"  said Mrs. Sprowle.  "I expected
there'd be ever so many of 'em left.  I did n't see many of the folks
eatin' oranges.  Where's the skins of 'em?  There ought to be six dozen
orange-skins round on the plates, and there a'n't one dozen. And all the
small cakes, too, and all the sugar things that was stuck on the big
cakes.  Has anybody counted the spoons?  Some of 'em got swallered,
perhaps.  I hope they was plated ones, if they did!"

The failure of the morning's orange-crop and the deficit in other
expected residual delicacies were not very difficult to account for. In
many of the two-story Rockland families, and in those favored households
of the neighboring villages whose members had been invited to the great
party, there was a very general excitement among the younger people on
the morning after the great event.  "Did y' bring home somethin' from the
party?  What is it?  What is it?  Is it frut-cake?  Is it nuts and
oranges and apples?  Give me some!  Give me some!"  Such a concert of
treble voices uttering accents like these had not been heard since the
great Temperance Festival with the celebrated "colation" in the open air
under the trees of the Parnassian Grove,--as the place was christened by
the young ladies of the Institute.  The cry of the children was not in
vain.  From the pockets of demure fathers, from the bags of sharp-eyed
spinsters, from the folded handkerchiefs of light-fingered sisters, from
the tall hats of sly-winking brothers, there was a resurrection of the
missing oranges and cakes and sugar-things in many a rejoicing
family-circle, enough to astonish the most hardened "caterer" that ever
contracted to feed a thousand people under canvas.

The tender recollections of those dear little ones whom extreme youth or
other pressing considerations detain from scenes of festivity--a trait of
affection by no means uncommon among our thoughtful people--dignifies
those social meetings where it is manifested, and sheds a ray of sunshine
on our common nature.  It is "an oasis in the desert,"--to use the
striking expression of the last year's "Valedictorian" of the Apollinean
Institute.  In the midst of so much that is purely selfish, it is
delightful to meet such disinterested care for others.  When a large
family of children are expecting a parent's return from an entertainment,
it will often require great exertions on his part to freight himself so
as to meet their reasonable expectations.  A few rules are worth
remembering by all who attend anniversary dinners in Faneuil Hall or
elsewhere.  Thus: Lobsters' claws are always acceptable to children of
all ages. Oranges and apples are to be taken one at a time, until the
coat-pockets begin to become inconveniently heavy.  Cakes are injured by
sitting upon them; it is, therefore, well to carry a stout tin box of a
size to hold as many pieces as there are children in the domestic circle.
A very pleasant amusement, at the close of one of these banquets, is
grabbing for the flowers with which the table is embellished.  These will
please the ladies at home very greatly, and, if the children are at the
same time abundantly supplied with fruits, nuts, cakes, and any little
ornamental articles of confectionery which are of a nature to be
unostentatiously removed, the kind-hearted parent will make a whole
household happy, without any additional expense beyond the outlay for his
ticket.

There were fragmentary delicacies enough left, of one kind and another,
at any rate, to make all the Colonel's family uncomfortable for the next
week.  It bid fair to take as long to get rid of the remains of the great
party as it had taken to make ready for it.

In the mean time Mr. Bernard had been dreaming, as young men dream, of
gliding shapes with bright eyes and burning cheeks, strangely blended
with red planets and hissing meteors, and, shining over all, the white,
un-wandering star of the North, girt with its tethered constellations.

After breakfast he walked into the parlor, where he found Miss Darley.
She was alone, and, holding a school-book in her hand, was at work with
one of the morning's lessons.  She hardly noticed him as he entered,
being very busy with her book,--and he paused a moment before speaking,
and looked at her with a kind of reverence.  It would not have been
strictly true to call her beautiful.  For years,--since her earliest
womanhood,--those slender hands had taken the bread which repaid the toil
of heart and brain from the coarse palms which offered it in the world's
rude market.  It was not for herself alone that she had bartered away the
life of her youth, that she had breathed the hot air of schoolrooms, that
she had forced her intelligence to posture before her will, as the
exigencies of her place required,--waking to mental labor,--sleeping to
dream of problems,--rolling up the stone of education for an endless
twelvemonth's term, to find it at the bottom of the hill again when
another year called her to its renewed duties, schooling her temper in
unending inward and outward conflicts, until neither dulness nor
obstinacy nor ingratitude nor insolence could reach her serene
self-possession.  Not for herself alone.  Poorly as her prodigal labors
were repaid in proportion to the waste of life they cost, her value was
too well established to leave her without what, under other
circumstances, would have been a more than sufficient compensation. But
there were others who looked to her in their need, and so the modest
fountain which might have been filled to its brim was continually drained
through silent-flowing, hidden sluices.

Out of such a life, inherited from a race which had lived in conditions
not unlike her own, beauty, in the common sense of the term, could hardly
find leisure to develop and shape itself.  For it must be remembered,
that symmetry and elegance of features and figure, like perfectly formed
crystals in the mineral world, are reached only by insuring a certain
necessary repose to individuals and to generations.  Human beauty is an
agricultural product in the country, growing up in men and women as in
corn and cattle, where the soil is good.  It is a luxury almost
monopolized by the rich in cities, bred under glass like their forced
pine-apples and peaches. Both in city and country, the evolution of the
physical harmonies which make music to our eyes requires a combination of
favorable circumstances, of which alternations of unburdened tranquillity
with intervals of varied excitement of mind and body are among the most
important.  Where sufficient excitement is wanting, as often happens in
the country, the features, however rich in red and white, get heavy, and
the movements sluggish; where excitement is furnished in excess, as is
frequently the case in cities, the contours and colors are impoverished,
and the nerves begin to make their existence known to the consciousness,
as the face very soon informs us.

Helen Darley could not, in the nature of things, have possessed the kind
of beauty which pleases the common taste.  Her eye was calm, sad-looking,
her features very still, except when her pleasant smile changed them for
a moment, all her outlines were delicate, her voice was very gentle, but
somewhat subdued by years of thoughtful labor, and on her smooth forehead
one little hinted line whispered already that Care was beginning to mark
the trace which Time sooner or later would make a furrow.  She could not
be a beauty; if she had been, it would have been much harder for many
persons to be interested in her. For, although in the abstract we all
love beauty, and although, if we were sent naked souls into some
ultramundane warehouse of soulless bodies and told to select one to our
liking, we should each choose a handsome one, and never think of the
consequences,--it is quite certain that beauty carries an atmosphere of
repulsion as well as of attraction with it, alike in both sexes.  We may
be well assured that there are many persons who no more think of
specializing their love of the other sex upon one endowed with signal
beauty, than they think of wanting great diamonds or thousand-dollar
horses.  No man or woman can appropriate beauty without paying for
it,--in endowments, in fortune, in position, in self-surrender, or other
valuable stock; and there are a great many who are too poor, too
ordinary, too humble, too busy, too proud, to pay any of these prices for
it.  So the unbeautiful get many more lovers than the beauties; only, as
there are more of them, their lovers are spread thinner and do not make
so much show.

The young master stood looking at Helen Darley with a kind of tender
admiration.  She was such a picture of the martyr by the slow social
combustive process, that it almost seemed to him he could see a pale
lambent nimbus round her head.

"I did not see you at the great party last evening," he said, presently.

She looked up and answered, "No.  I have not much taste for such large
companies.  Besides, I do not feel as if my time belonged to me after it
has been paid for.  There is always something to do, some lesson or
exercise,--and it so happened, I was very busy last night with the new
problems in geometry.  I hope you had a good time."

"Very.  Two or three of our girls were there.  Rosa Milburn.  What a
beauty she is!  I wonder what she feeds on!  Wine and musk and chloroform
and coals of fire, I believe; I didn't think there was such color and
flavor in a woman outside the tropics."

Miss Darley smiled rather faintly; the imagery was not just to her taste:
femineity often finds it very hard to accept the fact of muliebrity.

"Was"--?

She stopped short; but her question had asked itself.

"Elsie there?  She was, for an hour or so.  She looked frightfully
handsome.  I meant to have spoken to her, but she slipped away before I
knew it."

"I thought she meant to go to the party," said Miss Darley.  "Did she
look at you?"

"She did.  Why?"

"And you did not speak to her?"

"No.  I should have spoken to her, but she was gone when I looked for
her.  A strange creature!  Is n't there an odd sort of fascination about
her?  You have not explained all the mystery about the girl. What does
she come to this school for?  She seems to do pretty much as she likes
about studying."

Miss Darley answered in very low tones.  "It was a fancy of hers to come,
and they let her have her way.  I don't know what there is about her,
except that she seems to take my life out of me when she looks at me.  I
don't like to ask other people about our girls.  She says very little to
anybody, and studies, or makes believe to study, almost what she likes.
I don't know what she is," (Miss Darley laid her hand, trembling, on the
young master's sleeve,) "but I can tell when she is in the room without
seeing or hearing her.  Oh, Mr. Langdon, I am weak and nervous, and no
doubt foolish,--but--if there were women now, as in the days of our
Saviour, possessed of devils, I should think there was something not
human looking out of Elsie Venner's eyes!"

The poor girl's breast rose and fell tumultuously as she spoke, and her
voice labored, as if some obstruction were rising in her throat.

A scene might possibly have come of it, but the door opened.  Mr. Silas
Peckham.  Miss Darley got away as soon as she well could.

"Why did not Miss Darley go to the party last evening?" said Mr. Bernard.

"Well, the fact is," answered Mr. Silas Peckham, "Miss Darley, she's
pooty much took up with the school.  She's an industris young.
woman,--yis, she is industris,--but perhaps she a'n't quite so spry a
worker as some.  Maybe, considerin' she's paid for her time, she is n't
fur out o' the way in occoopyin' herself evenin's,--that--is, if so be
she a'n't smart enough to finish up all her work in the daytime.
Edoocation is the great business of the Institoot. Amoosements are
objec's of a secondary natur', accordin' to my v'oo." [The unspellable
pronunciation of this word is the touchstone of New England Brahminism.]

Mr. Bernard drew a deep breath, his thin nostrils dilating, as if the air
did not rush in fast enough to cool his blood, while Silas Peckham was
speaking.  The Head of the Apollinean Institute delivered himself of
these judicious sentiments in that peculiar acid, penetrating tone,
thickened with a nasal twang, which not rarely becomes hereditary after
three or four generations raised upon east winds, salt fish, and large,
white-bellied, pickled cucumbers.  He spoke deliberately, as if weighing
his words well, so that, during his few remarks, Mr. Bernard had time for
a mental accompaniment with variations, accented by certain bodily
changes, which escaped Mr. Peckham's observation.  First there was a
feeling of disgust and shame at hearing Helen Darley spoken of like a
dumb working animal. That sent the blood up into his cheeks.  Then the
slur upon her probable want of force--her incapacity, who made the
character of the school and left this man to pocket its profits--sent a
thrill of the old Wentworth fire through him, so that his muscles
hardened, his hands closed, and he took the measure of Mr. Silas Peckham,
to see if his head would strike the wall in case he went over backwards
all of a sudden.  This would not do, of course, and so the thrill passed
off and the muscles softened again.  Then came that state of tenderness
in the heart, overlying wrath in the stomach, in which the eyes grow
moist like a woman's, and there is also a great boiling-up of
objectionable terms out of the deep-water vocabulary, so that Prudence
and Propriety and all the other pious P's have to jump upon the lid of
speech to keep them from boiling over into fierce articulation.  All this
was internal, chiefly, and of course not recognized by Mr. Silas Peckham.
The idea, that any full-grown, sensible man should have any other notion
than that of getting the most work for the least money out of his
assistants, had never suggested itself to him.

Mr. Bernard had gone through this paroxysm, and cooled down, in the
period while Mr. Peckham was uttering these words in his thin, shallow
whine, twanging up into the frontal sinuses.  What was the use of losing
his temper and throwing away his place, and so, among the consequences
which would necessarily follow, leaving the poor lady-teacher without a
friend to stand by her ready to lay his hand on the grand-inquisitor
before the windlass of his rack had taken one turn too many?

"No doubt, Mr. Peckham," he said, in a grave, calm voice, "there is a
great deal of work to be done in the school; but perhaps we can
distribute the duties a little more evenly after a time.  I shall look
over the girls' themes myself, after this week.  Perhaps there will be
some other parts of her labor that I can take on myself.  We can arrange
a new programme of studies and recitations."

"We can do that," said Mr. Silas Peckham.  "But I don't propose mater'lly
alterin' Miss Darley's dooties.  I don't think she works to hurt herself.
Some of the Trustees have proposed interdoosin' new branches of study,
and I expect you will be pooty much occoopied with the dooties that
belong to your place.  On the Sahbath you will be able to attend divine
service three times, which is expected of our teachers.  I shall continoo
myself to give Sahbath Scriptur' readin's to the young ladies.  That is a
solemn dooty I can't make up my mind to commit to other people.  My
teachers enjoy the Lord's day as a day of rest.  In it they do no manner
of work, except in cases of necessity or mercy, such as fillin' out
diplomas, or when we git crowded jest at the end of a term, or when there
is an extry number of p'oopils, or other Providential call to dispense
with the ordinance."

Mr. Bernard had a fine glow in his cheeks by this time,--doubtless
kindled by the thought of the kind consideration Mr. Peckham showed for
his subordinates in allowing them the between meeting-time on Sundays
except for some special reason.  But the morning was wearing away; so he
went to the schoolroom, taking leave very properly of his respected
principal, who soon took his hat and departed.

Mr. Peckham visited certain "stores" or shops, where he made inquiries
after various articles in the provision-line, and effected a purchase or
two.  Two or three barrels of potatoes, which had sprouted in a promising
way, he secured at a bargain.  A side of feminine beef was also obtained
at a low figure.  He was entirely satisfied with a couple of barrels of
flour, which, being invoiced "slightly damaged," were to be had at a
reasonable price.

After this, Silas Peckham felt in good spirits.  He had done a pretty
stroke of business.  It came into his head whether he might not follow it
up with a still more brilliant speculation.  So he turned his steps in
the direction of Colonel Sprowle's.

It was now eleven o'clock, and the battle-field of last evening was as we
left it.  Mr. Peckham's visit was unexpected, perhaps not very well
timed, but the Colonel received him civilly.

"Beautifully lighted,--these rooms last night!" said Mr. Peckham.
"Winter-strained?"

The Colonel nodded.

"How much do you pay for your winter-strained?"

The Colonel told him the price.

"Very hahnsome supper,--very hahnsome.  Nothin' ever seen like it in
Rockland.  Must have been a great heap of things leftover."

The compliment was not ungrateful, and the Colonel acknowledged it by
smiling and saying, "I should think the' was a trifle?  Come and look."

When Silas Peckham saw how many delicacies had survived the evening's
conflict, his commercial spirit rose at once to the point of a proposal.

"Colonel Sprowle," said he, "there's 'meat and cakes and pies and pickles
enough on that table to spread a hahnsome colation.  If you'd like to
trade reasonable, I think perhaps I should be willin' to take 'em off
your hands.  There's been a talk about our havin' a celebration in the
Parnassian Grove, and I think I could work in what your folks don't want
and make myself whole by chargin' a small sum for tickets.  Broken meats,
of course, a'n't of the same valoo as fresh provisions; so I think you
might be willin' to trade reasonable."

Mr. Peckham paused and rested on his proposal.  It would not, perhaps,
have been very extraordinary, if Colonel Sprowle had entertained the
proposition.  There is no telling beforehand how such things will strike
people.  It didn't happen to strike the Colonel favorably.  He had a
little red-blooded manhood in him.

"Sell you them things to make a colation out of?" the Colonel replied.
"Walk up to that table, Mr. Peckham, and help yourself! Fill your
pockets; Mr. Peckham!  Fetch a basket, and our hired folks shall fill it
full for ye!  Send a cart, if y' like, 'n' carry off them leavin's to
make a celebration for your pupils with!  Only let me tell ye this:--as
sure 's my name's Hezekiah Spraowle, you 'll be known through the taown
'n' through the caounty, from that day forrard, as the Principal of the
Broken-Victuals Institoot!"

Even provincial human-nature sometimes has a touch of sublimity about it.
Mr. Silas Peckham had gone a little deeper than he meant, and come upon
the "hard pan," as the well-diggers call it, of the Colonel's character,
before he thought of it.  A militia-colonel standing on his sentiments is
not to be despised.  That was shown pretty well in New England two or
three generations ago.  There were a good many plain officers that talked
about their "rigiment" and their "caounty" who knew very well how to say
"Make ready!"  "Take aim!"  "Fire!"--in the face of a line of grenadiers
with bullets in their guns and bayonets on them.  And though a rustic
uniform is not always unexceptionable in its cut and trimmings, yet there
was many an ill-made coat in those old times that was good enough to be
shown to the enemy's front rank too often to be left on the field with a
round hole in its left lapel that matched another going right through the
brave heart of the plain country captain or major or colonel who was
buried in it under the crimson turf.

Mr. Silas Peckham said little or nothing.  His sensibilities were not
acute, but he perceived that he had made a miscalculation.  He hoped that
there was no offence,--thought it might have been mutooally agreeable,
conclooded he would give up the idee of a colation, and backed himself
out as if unwilling to expose the less guarded aspect of his person to
the risk of accelerating impulses.

The Colonel shut the door,--cast his eye on the toe of his right boot, as
if it had had a strong temptation,--looked at his watch, then round the
room, and, going to a cupboard, swallowed a glass of deep-red brandy and
water to compose his feelings.




CHAPTER IX.

THE DOCTOR ORDERS THE BEST SULKY. (With a Digression on "Hired Help.")

"ABEL!  Slip Cassia into the new sulky, and fetch her round."

Abel was Dr. Kittredge's hired man.  He was born in New Hampshire, a
queer sort of State, with fat streaks of soil and population where they
breed giants in mind and body, and lean streaks which export imperfectly
nourished young men with promising but neglected appetites, who may be
found in great numbers in all the large towns, or could be until of late
years, when they have been half driven out of their favorite
basement-stories by foreigners, and half coaxed away from them by
California.  New Hampshire is in more than one sense the Switzerland of
New England.  The "Granite State" being naturally enough deficient in
pudding-stone, its children are apt to wander southward in search of that
deposit,--in the unpetrified condition.

Abel Stebbins was a good specimen of that extraordinary hybrid or mule
between democracy and chrysocracy, a native-born New-England serving-man.
The Old World has nothing at all like him.  He is at once an emperor and
a subordinate.  In one hand he holds one five-millionth part (be the same
more or less) of the power that sways the destinies of the Great
Republic.  His other hand is in your boot, which he is about to polish.
It is impossible to turn a fellow citizen whose vote may make his
master--say, rather, employer--Governor or President, or who may be one
or both himself, into a flunky.  That article must be imported ready-made
from other centres of civilization.  When a New Englander has lost his
self-respect as a citizen and as a man, he is demoralized, and cannot be
trusted with the money to pay for a dinner.

It may be supposed, therefore, that this fractional emperor, this
continent-shaper, finds his position awkward when he goes into service,
and that his employer is apt to find it still more embarrassing.  It is
always under protest that the hired man does his duty.  Every act of
service is subject to the drawback, "I am as good as you are."  This is
so common, at least, as almost to be the rule, and partly accounts for
the rapid disappearance of the indigenous "domestic" from the basements
above mentioned.  Paleontologists will by and by be examining the floors
of our kitchens for tracks of the extinct native species of serving-man.
The female of the same race is fast dying out; indeed, the time is not
far distant when all the varieties of young woman will have vanished from
New England, as the dodo has perished in the Mauritius.  The young lady
is all that we shall have left, and the mop and duster of the last Ahnira
or Loizy will be stared at by generations of Bridgets and Noras as that
famous head and foot of the lost bird are stared at in the Ashmolean
Museum.

Abel Stebbins, the Doctor's man, took the true American view of his
difficult position.  He sold his time to the Doctor, and, having sold it,
he took care to fulfil his half of the bargain.  The Doctor, on his part,
treated him, not like a gentleman, because one does not order a gentleman
to bring up his horse or run his errands, but he treated him like a man.
Every order was given in courteous terms. His reasonable privileges were
respected as much as if they had been guaranteed under hand and seal.
The Doctor lent him books from his own library, and gave him all friendly
counsel, as if he were a son or a younger brother.

Abel had Revolutionary blood in his veins, and though he saw fit to "hire
out," he could never stand the word "servant," or consider himself the
inferior one of the two high contracting parties.  When he came to live
with the Doctor, he made up his mind he would dismiss the old gentleman,
if he did not behave according to his notions of propriety.  But he soon
found that the Doctor was one of the right sort, and so determined to
keep him.  The Doctor soon found, on his side, that he had a trustworthy,
intelligent fellow, who would be invaluable to him, if he only let him
have his own way of doing what was to be done.

The Doctor's hired man had not the manners of a French valet.  He was
grave and taciturn for the most part, he never bowed and rarely smiled,
but was always at work in the daytime, and always reading in the evening.
He was hostler, and did all the housework that a man could properly do,
would go to the door or "tend table," bought the provisions for the
family,--in short, did almost everything for them but get their clothing.
There was no office in a perfectly appointed household, from that of
steward down to that of stable-boy, which he did not cheerfully assume.
His round of work not consuming all his energies, he must needs cultivate
the Doctor's garden, which he kept in one perpetual bloom, from the
blowing of the first crocus to the fading of the last dahlia.

This garden was Abel's poem.  Its half-dozen beds were so many cantos.
Nature crowded them for him with imagery such as no Laureate could copy
in the cold mosaic of language.  The rhythm of alternating dawn and
sunset, the strophe and antistrophe still perceptible through all the
sudden shifts of our dithyrambic seasons and echoed in corresponding
floral harmonies, made melody in the soul of Abel, the plain serving-man.
It softened his whole otherwise rigid aspect. He worshipped God according
to the strict way of his fathers; but a florist's Puritanism is always
colored by the petals of his flowers,--and Nature never shows him a
black corolla.

He may or may not figure again in this narrative; but as there must be
some who confound the New England hired man, native-born, with the
servant of foreign birth, and as there is the difference of two
continents and two civilizations between them, it did not seem fair to
let Abel bring round the Doctor's mare and sulky without touching his
features in half-shadow into our background.

The Doctor's mare, Cassia, was so called by her master from her cinnamon
color, cassia being one of the professional names for that spice or drug.
She was of the shade we call sorrel, or, as an Englishman would perhaps
say, chestnut,--a genuine "Morgan" mare, with a low forehand, as is
common in this breed, but with strong quarters and flat hocks, well
ribbed up, with a good eye and a pair of lively ears,--a first-rate
doctor's beast, would stand until her harness dropped off her back at the
door of a tedious case, and trot over hill and dale thirty miles in three
hours, if there was a child in the next county with a bean in its
windpipe and the Doctor gave her a hint of the fact.  Cassia was not
large, but she had a good deal of action, and was the Doctor's
show-horse.  There were two other animals in his stable: Quassia or
Quashy, the black horse, and Caustic, the old bay, with whom he jogged
round the village.

"A long ride to-day?" said Abel, as he brought up the equipage.

"Just out of the village,--that 's all.--There 's a kink in her
mane,--pull it out, will you?"

"Goin' to visit some of the great folks," Abel said to himself.  "Wonder
who it is."--Then to the Doctor,--"Anybody get sick at Sprowles's?  They
say Deacon Soper had a fit, after eatin' some o' their frozen victuals."

The Doctor smiled.  He guessed the Deacon would do well enough.  He was
only going to ride over to the Dudley mansion-house.




CHAPTER X.

THE DOCTOR CALLS ON ELSIE VENNER.

If that primitive physician, Chiron, M. D., appears as a Centaur, as we
look at him through the lapse of thirty centuries, the modern
country-doctor, if he could be seen about thirty miles off, could not be
distinguished from a wheel-animalcule.  He inhabits a wheel-carriage.  He
thinks of stationary dwellings as Long Tom Coffin did of land in general;
a house may be well enough for incidental purposes, but for a "stiddy"
residence give him a "kerridge."  If he is classified in the Linnaean
scale, he must be set down thus: Genus Homo; Species Rotifer infusorius,
the wheel-animal of infusions.

The Dudley mansion was not a mile from the Doctor's; but it never
occurred to him to think of walking to see any of his patients' families,
if he had any professional object in his visit.  Whenever the narrow
sulky turned in at a gate, the rustic who was digging potatoes, or hoeing
corn, or swishing through the grass with his scythe, in wave-like
crescents, or stepping short behind a loaded wheelbarrow, or trudging
lazily by the side of the swinging, loose-throated, short-legged oxen,
rocking along the road as if they had just been landed after a
three-months' voyage, the toiling native, whatever he was doing, stopped
and looked up at the house the Doctor was visiting.

"Somebody sick over there t' Haynes's.  Guess th' old man's ailin' ag'in.
Winder's half-way open in the chamber,--should n' wonder 'f he was dead
and laid aout.  Docterin' a'n't no use, when y' see th' winders open like
that.  Wahl, money a'n't much to speak of to th' old man naow!  He don'
want but tew cents,--'n' old Widah Peake, she knows what he wants them
for!"

Or again,--

"Measles raound pooty thick.  Briggs's folks buried two children with 'em
lass' week.  Th' of Doctor, he'd h' ker'd 'em threugh.  Struck in 'n'
p'dooced mo't'f'cation,--so they say."

This is only meant as a sample of the kind of way they used to think or
talk, when the narrow sulky turned in at the gate of some house where
there was a visit to be made.

Oh, that narrow sulky!  What hopes, what fears, what comfort, what
anguish, what despair, in the roll of its coming or its parting wheels!
In the spring, when the old people get the coughs which give them a few
shakes and their lives drop in pieces like the ashes of a burned thread
which have kept the threadlike shape until they were stirred,--in the hot
summer noons, when the strong man comes in from the fields, like the son
of the Shunamite, crying, "My head, my head,"--in the dying autumn days,
when youth and maiden lie fever-stricken in many a household,
still-faced, dull-eyed, dark-flushed, dry-lipped, low-muttering in their
daylight dreams, their fingers moving singly like those of slumbering
harpers,--in the dead winter, when the white plague of the North has
caged its wasted victims, shuddering as they think of the frozen soil
which must be quarried like rock to receive them, if their perpetual
convalescence should happen to be interfered with by any untoward
accident,--at every season, the narrow sulky rolled round freighted with
unmeasured burdens of joy and woe.

The Doctor drove along the southern foot of The Mountain.  The "Dudley
Mansion" was near the eastern edge of this declivity, where it rose
steepest, with baldest cliffs and densest patches of overhanging wood.
It seemed almost too steep to climb, but a practised eye could see from a
distance the zigzag lines of the sheep-paths which scaled it like
miniature Alpine roads.  A few hundred feet up The Mountain's side was a
dark deep dell, unwooded, save for a few spindling, crazy-looking
hackmatacks or native larches, with pallid green tufts sticking out
fantastically all over them.  It shelved so deeply, that, while the
hemlock-tassels were swinging on the trees around its border, all would
be still at its springy bottom, save that perhaps a single fern would
wave slowly backward and forward like a sabre with a twist as of a
feathered oar,--and this when not a breath could be felt, and every other
stem and blade were motionless.  There was an old story of one having
perished here in the winter of '86, and his body having been found in the
spring,--whence its common name of "Dead-Man's Hollow."  Higher up there
were huge cliffs with chasms, and, it was thought, concealed caves, where
in old times they said that Tories lay hid,--some hinted not without
occasional aid and comfort from the Dudleys then living in the
mansion-house.  Still higher and farther west lay the accursed
ledge,--shunned by all, unless it were now and then a daring youth, or a
wandering naturalist who ventured to its edge in the hope of securing
some infantile Crotalus durissus, who had not yet cut his poison teeth.

Long, long ago, in old Colonial times, the Honorable Thomas Dudley,
Esquire, a man of note and name and great resources, allied by descent to
the family of "Tom Dudley," as the early Governor is sometimes
irreverently called by our most venerable, but still youthful
antiquary,--and to the other public Dudleys, of course,--of all of whom
he made small account, as being himself an English gentleman, with little
taste for the splendors of provincial office, early in the last century,
Thomas Dudley had built this mansion.  For several generations it had
been dwelt in by descendants of the same name, but soon after the
Revolution it passed by marriage into the hands of the Venners, by whom
it had ever since been held and tenanted.

As the doctor turned an angle in the road, all at once the stately old
house rose before him.  It was a skilfully managed effect, as it well
might be, for it was no vulgar English architect who had planned the
mansion and arranged its position and approach.  The old house rose
before the Doctor, crowning a terraced garden, flanked at the left by an
avenue of tall elms.  The flower-beds were edged with box, which diffused
around it that dreamy balsamic odor, full of ante-natal reminiscences of
a lost Paradise, dimly fragrant as might be the bdellium of ancient
Havilah, the land compassed by the river Pison that went out of Eden.
The garden was somewhat neglected, but not in disgrace,--and in the time
of tulips and hyacinths, of roses, of "snowballs," of honeysuckles, of
lilacs, of syringas, it was rich with blossoms.

From the front-windows of the mansion the eye reached a far blue
mountain-summit,--no rounded heap, such as often shuts in a
village-landscape, but a sharp peak, clean-angled as Ascutney from the
Dartmouth green.  A wide gap through miles of woods had opened this
distant view, and showed more, perhaps, than all the labors of the
architect and the landscape-gardener the large style of the early
Dudleys.

The great stone-chimney of the mansion-house was the centre from which
all the artificial features of the scene appeared to flow.  The roofs,
the gables, the dormer-windows, the porches, the clustered offices in the
rear, all seemed to crowd about the great chimney.  To this central
pillar the paths all converged.  The single poplar behind the
house,--Nature is jealous of proud chimneys, and always loves to put a
poplar near one, so that it may fling a leaf or two down its black throat
every autumn,--the one tall poplar behind the house seemed to nod and
whisper to the grave square column, the elms to sway their branches
towards it.  And when the blue smoke rose from its summit, it seemed to
be wafted away to join the azure haze which hung around the peak in the
far distance, so that both should bathe in a common atmosphere.

Behind the house were clumps of lilacs with a century's growth upon them,
and looking more like trees than like shrubs.  Shaded by a group of these
was the ancient well, of huge circuit, and with a low arch opening out of
its wall about ten feet below the surface,--whether the door of a crypt
for the concealment of treasure, or of a subterranean passage, or merely
of a vault for keeping provisions cool in hot weather, opinions differed.

On looking at the house, it was plain that it was built with Old-World
notions of strength and durability, and, so far as might be, with
Old-World materials.  The hinges of the doors stretched out like arms,
instead of like hands, as we make them.  The bolts were massive enough
for a donjon-keep.  The small window-panes were actually inclosed in the
wood of the sashes instead of being stuck to them with putty, as in our
modern windows.  The broad staircase was of easy ascent, and was guarded
by quaintly turned and twisted balusters.  The ceilings of the two rooms
of state were moulded with medallion-portraits and rustic figures, such
as may have been seen by many readers in the famous old Philipse
house,--Washington's head-quarters,--in the town of Yorkers.  The
fire-places, worthy of the wide-throated central chimney, were bordered
by pictured tiles, some of them with Scripture stories, some with
Watteau-like figures,--tall damsels in slim waists and with spread enough
of skirt for a modern ballroom, with bowing, reclining, or musical swains
of what everybody calls the "conventional" sort,--that is, the swain
adapted to genteel society rather than to a literal sheep-compelling
existence.

The house was furnished, soon after it was completed, with many heavy
articles made in London from a rare wood just then come into fashion, not
so rare now, and commonly known as mahogany.  Time had turned it very
dark, and the stately bedsteads and tall cabinets and claw-footed chairs
and tables were in keeping with the sober dignity of the ancient mansion.
The old "hangings" were yet preserved in the chambers, faded, but still
showing their rich patterns,--properly entitled to their name, for they
were literally hung upon flat wooden frames like trellis-work, which
again were secured to the naked partitions.

There were portraits of different date on the walls of the various
apartments, old painted coats-of-arms, bevel-edged mirrors, and in one
sleeping-room a glass case of wax-work flowers and spangly symbols, with
a legend signifying that E. M. (supposed to be Elizabeth Mascarene)
wished not to be "forgot"

         "When I am dead and lay'd in dust
          And all my bones are"--

Poor E. M.!  Poor everybody that sighs for earthly remembrance in a
planet with a core of fire and a crust of fossils!

Such was the Dudley mansion-house,--for it kept its ancient name in spite
of the change in the line of descent.  Its spacious apartments looked
dreary and desolate; for here Dudley Venner and his daughter dwelt by
themselves, with such servants only as their quiet mode of life required.
He almost lived in his library, the western room on the ground-floor.
Its window looked upon a small plat of green, in the midst of which was a
single grave marked by a plain marble slab. Except this room, and the
chamber where he slept, and the servants' wing, the rest of the house was
all Elsie's.  She was always a restless, wandering child from her early
years, and would have her little bed moved from one chamber to
another,--flitting round as the fancy took her.  Sometimes she would drag
a mat and a pillow into one of the great empty rooms, and, wrapping
herself in a shawl, coil up and go to sleep in a corner.  Nothing
frightened her; the "haunted" chamber, with the torn hangings that
flapped like wings when there was air stirring, was one of her favorite
retreats.  She had been a very hard creature to manage.  Her father could
influence, but not govern her.  Old Sophy, born of a slave mother in the
house, could do more with her than anybody, knowing her by long
instinctive study. The other servants were afraid of her.  Her father had
sent for governesses, but none of them ever stayed long.  She made them
nervous; one of them had a strange fit of sickness; not one of them ever
came back to the house to see her.  A young Spanish woman who taught her
dancing succeeded best with her, for she had a passion for that exercise,
and had mastered some of the most difficult dances. Long before this
period, she had manifested some most extraordinary singularities of taste
or instinct.  The extreme sensitiveness of her father on this point
prevented any allusion to them; but there were stories floating round,
some of them even getting into the papers,--without her name, of
course,--which were of a kind to excite intense curiosity, if not more
anxious feelings.  This thing was certain, that at the age of twelve she
was missed one night, and was found sleeping in the open air under a
tree, like a wild creature.  Very often she would wander off by day,
always without a companion, bringing home with her a nest, a flower, or
even a more questionable trophy of her ramble, such as showed that there
was no place where she was afraid to venture.  Once in a while she had
stayed out over night, in which case the alarm was spread, and men went
in search of her, but never successfully,--so--that some said she hid
herself in trees, and others that she had found one of the old Tory
caves.

Some, of course, said she was a crazy girl, and ought to be sent to an
Asylum.  But old Dr. Kittredge had shaken his head, and told them to bear
with her, and let her have her way as much as they could, but watch her,
as far as possible, without making her suspicious of them. He visited her
now and then, under the pretext of seeing her father on business, or of
only making a friendly call.

The Doctor fastened his horse outside the gate, and walked up the
garden-alley.  He stopped suddenly with a start.  A strange sound had
jarred upon his ear.  It was a sharp prolonged rattle, continuous, but
rising and falling as if in rhythmical cadence.  He moved softly towards
the open window from which the sound seemed to proceed.

Elsie was alone in the room, dancing one of those wild Moorish fandangos,
such as a matador hot from the Plaza de Toros of Seville or Madrid might
love to lie and gaze at.  She was a figure to look upon in silence.  The
dancing frenzy must have seized upon her while she was dressing; for she
was in her bodice, bare-armed, her hair floating unbound far below the
waist of her barred or banded skirt. She had caught up her castanets, and
rattled them as she danced with a kind of passionate fierceness, her
lithe body undulating with flexuous grace, her diamond eyes glittering,
her round arms wreathing and unwinding, alive and vibrant to the tips of
the slender fingers. Some passion seemed to exhaust itself in this
dancing paroxysm; for all at once she reeled from the middle of the
floor, and flung herself, as it were in a careless coil, upon a great
tiger's-skin which was spread out in one corner of the apartment.

The old Doctor stood motionless, looking at her as she lay panting on the
tawny, black-lined robe of the dead monster which stretched out beneath
her, its rude flattened outline recalling the Terror of the Jungle as he
crouched for his fatal spring.  In a few moments her head drooped upon
her arm, and her glittering eyes closed,--she was sleeping.  He stood
looking at her still, steadily, thoughtfully, tenderly.  Presently he
lifted his hand to his forehead, as if recalling some fading remembrance
of other years.

"Poor Catalina!"

This was all he said.  He shook his head,--implying that his visit would
be in vain to-day,--returned to his sulky, and rode away, as if in a
dream.




CHAPTER XI.

COUSIN RICHARD'S VISIT.

The Doctor was roused from his revery by the clatter of approaching
hoofs.  He looked forward and saw a young fellow galloping rapidly
towards him.

A common New-England rider with his toes turned out, his elbows jerking
and the daylight showing under him at every step, bestriding a cantering
beast of the plebeian breed, thick at every point where he should be
thin, and thin at every point where he should be thick, is not one of
those noble objects that bewitch the world.  The best horsemen outside of
the cities are the unshod countryboys, who ride "bareback," with only a
halter round the horse's neck, digging their brown heels into his ribs,
and slanting over backwards, but sticking on like leeches, and taking the
hardest trot as if they loved it.--This was a different sight on which
the Doctor was looking.  The streaming mane and tail of the unshorn,
savage-looking, black horse, the dashing grace with which the young
fellow in the shadowy sombrero, and armed with the huge spurs, sat in his
high-peaked saddle, could belong only to the mustang of the Pampas and
his master.  This bold rider was a young man whose sudden apparition in
the quiet inland town had reminded some of the good people of a bright,
curly-haired boy they had known some eight or ten years before as little
Dick Venner.

This boy had passed several of his early years at the Dudley mansion, the
playmate of Elsie, being her cousin, two or three years older than
herself, the son of Captain Richard Venner, a South American trader, who,
as he changed his residence often, was glad to leave the boy in his
brother's charge.  The Captain's wife, this boy's mother, was a lady of
Buenos Ayres, of Spanish descent, and had died while the child was in his
cradle.  These two motherless children were as strange a pair as one roof
could well cover.  Both handsome, wild, impetuous, unmanageable, they
played and fought together like two young leopards, beautiful, but
dangerous, their lawless instincts showing through all their graceful
movements.

The boy was little else than a young Gaucho when he first came to
Rockland; for he had learned to ride almost as soon as to walk, and could
jump on his pony and trip up a runaway pig with the bolas or noose him
with his miniature lasso at an age when some city-children would hardly
be trusted out of sight of a nursery-maid.  It makes men imperious to sit
a horse; no man governs his fellows so well as from this living throne.
And so, from Marcus Aurelius in Roman bronze, down to the "man on
horseback" in General Cushing's prophetic speech, the saddle has always
been the true seat of empire.  The absolute tyranny of the human will
over a noble and powerful beast develops the instinct of personal
prevalence and dominion; so that horse-subduer and hero were almost
synonymous in simpler times, and are closely related still.  An ancestry
of wild riders naturally enough bequeaths also those other tendencies
which we see in the Tartars, the Cossacks, and our own Indian Centaurs,
and as well, perhaps, in the old-fashioned fox-hunting squire as in any
of these.  Sharp alternations of violent action and self-indulgent
repose; a hard run, and a long revel after it; this is what over-much
horse tends to animalize a man into.  Such antecedents may have helped to
make little Dick Venner a self-willed, capricious boy, and a rough
playmate for Elsie.

Elsie was the wilder of the two.  Old Sophy, who used to watch them with
those quick, animal-looking eyes of hers,--she was said to be the
granddaughter of a cannibal chief, and inherited the keen senses
belonging to all creatures which are hunted as game, Old Sophy, who
watched them in their play and their quarrels, always seemed to be more
afraid for the boy than the girl.  "Masse Dick!  Masse Dick! don' you be
too rough wi' dat gal!  She scratch you las' week, 'n' some day she bite
you; 'n' if she bite you, Masse Dick!"  Old Sophy nodded her head
ominously, as if she could say a great deal more; while, in grateful
acknowledgment of her caution, Master Dick put his two little fingers in
the angles of his mouth, and his forefingers on his lower eyelids,
drawing upon these features until his expression reminded her of
something she vaguely recollected in her infancy,--the face of a
favorite deity executed in wood by an African artist for her grandfather,
brought over by her mother, and burned when she became a Christian.

These two wild children had much in common.  They loved to ramble
together, to build huts, to climb trees for nests, to ride the colts, to
dance, to race, and to play at boys' rude games as if both were boys.
But wherever two natures have a great deal in common, the conditions of a
first-rate quarrel are furnished ready-made. Relations are very apt to
hate each other just because they are too much alike.  It is so frightful
to be in an atmosphere of family idiosyncrasies; to see all the
hereditary uncomeliness or infirmity of body, all the defects of speech,
all the failings of temper, intensified by concentration, so that every
fault of our own finds itself multiplied by reflections, like our images
in a saloon lined with mirrors!  Nature knows what she is about.  The
centrifugal principle which grows out of the antipathy of like to like is
only the repetition in character of the arrangement we see expressed
materially in certain seed-capsules, which burst and throw the seed to
all points of the compass.  A house is a large pod with a human germ or
two in each of its cells or chambers; it opens by dehiscence of the
front-door by and by, and projects one of its germs to Kansas, another to
San Francisco, another to Chicago, and so on; and this that Smith may not
be Smithed to death and Brown may not be Browned into a mad-house, but
mix in with the world again and struggle back to average humanity.

Elsie's father, whose fault was to indulge her in everything, found that
it would never do to let these children grow up together.  They would
either love each other as they got older, and pair like wild creatures,
or take some fierce antipathy, which might end nobody could tell where.
It was not safe to try.  The boy must be sent away.  A sharper quarrel
than common decided this point.  Master Dick forgot Old Sophy's caution,
and vexed the girl into a paroxysm of wrath, in which she sprang at him
and bit his arm.  Perhaps they made too much of it; for they sent for the
old Doctor, who came at once when he heard what had happened.  He had a
good deal to say about the danger there was from the teeth of animals or
human beings when enraged; and as he emphasized his remarks by the
application of a pencil of lunar caustic to each of the marks left by the
sharp white teeth, they were like to be remembered by at least one of his
hearers.

So Master Dick went off on his travels, which led him into strange places
and stranger company.  Elsie was half pleased and half sorry to have him
go; the children had a kind of mingled liking and hate for each other,
just such as is very common among relations.  Whether the girl had most
satisfaction in the plays they shared, or in teasing him, or taking her
small revenge upon him for teasing her, it would have been hard to say.
At any rate, she was lonely without him.  She had more fondness for the
old black woman than anybody; but Sophy could not follow her far beyond
her own old rocking-chair.  As for her father, she had made him afraid of
her, not for his sake, but for her own.  Sometimes she would seem to be
fond of him, and the parent's heart would yearn within him as she twined
her supple arms about him; and then some look she gave him, some
half-articulated expression, would turn his cheek pale and almost make
him shiver, and he would say kindly, "Now go, Elsie, dear,"  and smile
upon her as she went, and close and lock the door softly after her.  Then
his forehead would knot and furrow itself, and the drops of anguish stand
thick upon it.  He would go to the western window of his study and look
at the solitary mound with the marble slab for its head-stone. After his
grief had had its way, he would kneel down and pray for his child as one
who has no hope save in that special grace which can bring the most
rebellious spirit into sweet subjection.  All this might seem like
weakness in a parent having the charge of one sole daughter of his house
and heart; but he had tried authority and tenderness by turns so long
without any good effect, that he had become sore perplexed, and,
surrounding her with cautious watchfulness as he best might, left her in
the main to her own guidance and the merciful influences which Heaven
might send down to direct her footsteps.

Meantime the boy grew up to youth and early manhood through a strange
succession of adventures.  He had been at school at Buenos Ayres,--had
quarrelled with his mother's relatives,--had run off to the Pampas, and
lived with the Gauchos;--had made friends with the Indians, and ridden
with them, it was rumored, in some of their savage forays,--had returned
and made up his quarrel,--had got money by inheritance or otherwise,--had
troubled the peace of certain magistrates,--had found it convenient to
leave the City of Wholesome Breezes for a time, and had galloped off on a
fast horse of his, (so it was said,) with some officers riding after him,
who took good care (but this was only the popular story) not to catch
him.  A few days after this he was taking his ice on the Alameda of
Mendoza, and a week or two later sailed from Valparaiso for New York,
carrying with him the horse with which he had scampered over the Plains,
a trunk or two with his newly purchased outfit of, clothing and other
conveniences, and a belt heavy with gold and with a few Brazilian
diamonds sewed in it, enough in value to serve him for a long journey.

Dick Venner had seen life enough to wear out the earlier sensibilities of
adolescence.  He was tired of worshipping or tyrannizing over the bistred
or umbered beauties of mingled blood among whom he had been living.  Even
that piquant exhibition which the Rio de Mendoza presents to the amateur
of breathing sculpture failed to interest him.  He was thinking of a
far-off village on the other side of the equator, and of the wild girl
with whom he used to play and quarrel, a creature of a different race
from these degenerate mongrels.

"A game little devil she was, sure enough!"--And as Dick spoke, he bared
his wrist to look for the marks she had left on it: two small white
scars, where the two small sharp upper teeth had struck when she flashed
at him with her eyes sparkling as bright as those glittering stones sewed
up in the belt he wore.  "That's a filly worth noosing!" said Dick to
himself, as he looked in admiration at the sign of her spirit and
passion.  "I wonder if she will bite at eighteen as she did at eight!
She shall have a chance to try, at any rate!"

Such was the self-sacrificing disposition with which Richard Venner,
Esq., a passenger by the Condor from Valparaiso, set foot upon his native
shore, and turned his face in the direction of Rockland, The Mountain,
and the mansion-house.  He had heard something, from time to time, of his
New-England relatives, and knew that they were living together as he left
them.  And so he heralded himself to "My dear Uncle" by a letter signed
"Your loving nephew, Richard Venner," in which letter he told a very
frank story of travel and mercantile adventure, expressed much gratitude
for the excellent counsel and example which had helped to form his
character and preserve him in the midst of temptation, inquired
affectionately after his uncle's health, was much interested to know
whether his lively cousin who used to be his playmate had grown up as
handsome as she promised to be, and announced his intention of paying his
respects to them both at Rockland.  Not long after this came the trunks
marked R. V. which he had sent before him, forerunners of his advent: he
was not going to wait for a reply or an invitation.

What a sound that is,--the banging down of the preliminary trunk, without
its claimant to give it the life which is borrowed by all personal
appendages, so long as the owner's hand or eye is on them! If it announce
the coming of one loved and longed for, how we delight to look at it, to
sit down on it, to caress it in our fancies, as a lone exile walking out
on a windy pier yearns towards the merchantman lying alongside, with the
colors of his own native land at her peak, and the name of the port he
sailed from long ago upon her stern!  But if it tell the near approach of
the undesired, inevitable guest, what sound short of the muffled noises
made by the undertakers as they turn the corners in the dim-lighted
house, with low shuffle of feet and whispered cautions, carries such a
sense of knocking-kneed collapse with it as the thumping down in the
front entry of the heavy portmanteau, rammed with the changes of
uncounted coming weeks?

Whether the R. V. portmanteaus brought one or the other of these emotions
to the tenants of the Dudley mansion, it might not be easy to settle.
Elsie professed to be pleased with the thought of having an adventurous
young stranger, with stories to tell, an inmate of their quiet, not to
say dull, family.  Under almost any other circumstances, her father would
have been unwilling to take a young fellow of whom he knew so little
under his roof; but this was his nephew, and anything that seemed like to
amuse or please Elsie was agreeable to him.  He had grown almost
desperate, and felt as if any change in the current of her life and
feelings might save her from some strange paroxysm of dangerous mental
exaltation or sullen perversion of disposition, from which some fearful
calamity might come to herself or others.

Dick had been several weeks at the Dudley mansion.  A few days before, he
had made a sudden dash for the nearest large city,--and when the Doctor
met him, he was just returning from his visit.

It had been a curious meeting between the two young persons, who had
parted so young and after such strange relations with each other. When
Dick first presented himself at the mansion, not one in the house would
have known him for the boy who had left them all so suddenly years ago.
He was so dark, partly from his descent, partly from long habits of
exposure, that Elsie looked almost fair beside him.  He had something of
the family beauty which belonged to his cousin, but his eye had a fierce
passion in it, very unlike the cold glitter of Elsie's.  Like many people
of strong and imperious temper, he was soft-voiced and very gentle in his
address, when he had no special reason for being otherwise.  He soon
found reasons enough to be as amiable as he could force himself to be
with his uncle and his cousin.  Elsie was to his fancy.  She had a
strange attraction for him, quite unlike anything he had ever known in
other women.  There was something, too, in early associations: when those
who parted as children meet as man and woman, there is always a renewal
of that early experience which followed the taste of the forbidden
fruit,--a natural blush of consciousness, not without its charm.

Nothing could be more becoming than the behavior of "Richard Venner,
Esquire, the guest of Dudley Venner, Esquire, at his noble mansion," as
he was announced in the Court column of the "Rockland Weekly Universe."
He was pleased to find himself treated with kindness and attention as a
relative.  He made himself very agreeable by abundant details concerning
the religious, political, social, commercial, and educational progress of
the South American cities and states.  He was himself much interested in
everything that was going on about the Dudley mansion, walked all over
it, noticed its valuable wood-lots with special approbation, was
delighted with the grand old house and its furniture, and would not be
easy until he had seen all the family silver and heard its history.  In
return, he had much to tell of his father, now dead,--the only one of the
Venners, beside themselves, in whose fate his uncle was interested.  With
Elsie, he was subdued and almost tender in his manner; with the few
visitors whom they saw, shy and silent,--perhaps a little watchful, if
any young man happened to be among them.

Young fellows placed on their good behavior are apt to get restless and
nervous, all ready to fly off into some mischief or other.  Dick Venner
had his half-tamed horse with him to work off his suppressed life with.
When the savage passion of his young blood came over him, he would fetch
out the mustang, screaming and kicking as these amiable beasts are wont
to do, strap the Spanish saddle tight to his back, vault into it, and,
after getting away from the village, strike the long spurs into his sides
and whirl away in a wild gallop, until the black horse was flecked with
white foam, and the cruel steel points were red with his blood.  When
horse and rider were alike fired, he would fling the bridle on his neck
and saunter homeward, always contriving to get to the stable in a quiet
way, and coming into the house as calm as a bishop after a sober trot on
his steady-going cob.

After a few weeks of this kind of life, he began to want some more fierce
excitement.  He had tried making downright love to Elsie, with no great
success as yet, in his own opinion.  The girl was capricious in her
treatment of him, sometimes scowling and repellent, sometimes familiar,
very often, as she used to be of old, teasing and malicious.  All this,
perhaps, made her more interesting to a young man who was tired of easy
conquests.  There was a strange fascination in her eyes, too, which at
times was quite irresistible, so that he would feel himself drawn to her
by a power which seemed to take away his will for the moment.  It may
have been nothing but the common charm of bright eyes; but he had never
before experienced the same kind of attraction.

Perhaps she was not so very different from what she had been as a child,
after all.  At any rate, so it seemed to Dick Venner, who, as was said
before, had tried making love to her.  They were sitting alone in the
study one day; Elsie had round her neck that somewhat peculiar ornament,
the golden torque, which she had worn to the great party.  Youth is
adventurous and very curious about necklaces, brooches, chains, and other
such adornments, so long as they are worn by young persons of the female
sex.  Dick was seized with a great passion for examining this curious
chain, and, after some preliminary questions, was rash enough to lean
towards her and put out his hand toward the neck that lay in the golden
coil.

She threw her head back, her eyes narrowing and her forehead drawing down
so that Dick thought her head actually flattened itself.  He started
involuntarily; for she looked so like the little girl who had struck him
with those sharp flashing teeth, that the whole scene came back, and he
felt the stroke again as if it had just been given, and the two white
scars began to sting as they did after the old Doctor had burned them
with that stick of gray caustic, which looked so like a slate pencil, and
felt so much like the end of a red-hot poker.

It took something more than a gallop to set him right after this. The
next day he mentioned having received a letter from a mercantile agent
with whom he had dealings.  What his business was is, perhaps, none of
our business.  At any rate, it required him to go at once to the city
where his correspondent resided.

Independently of this "business" which called him, there may have been
other motives, such as have been hinted at.  People who have been living
for a long time in dreary country-places, without any emotion beyond such
as are occasioned by a trivial pleasure or annoyance, often get crazy at
last for a vital paroxysm of some kind or other.  In this state they rush
to the great cities for a plunge into their turbid life-baths, with a
frantic thirst for every exciting pleasure, which makes them the willing
and easy victims of all those who sell the Devil's wares on commission.
The less intelligent and instructed class of unfortunates, who venture
with their ignorance and their instincts into what is sometimes called
the "life" of great cities, are put through a rapid course of instruction
which entitles them very commonly to a diploma from the police court. But
they only illustrate the working of the same tendency in mankind at large
which has been occasionally noticed in the sons of ministers and other
eminently worthy people, by many ascribed to that intense congenital
hatred for goodness which distinguishes human nature from that of the
brute, but perhaps as readily accounted for by considering it as the
yawning and stretching of a young soul cramped too long in one moral
posture.

Richard Veneer was a young man of remarkable experience for his years.
He ran less risk, therefore, in exposing himself to the temptations and
dangers of a great city than many older men, who, seeking the livelier
scenes of excitement to be found in large towns as a relaxation after the
monotonous routine of family life, are too often taken advantage of and
made the victims of their sentiments or their generous confidence in
their fellow-creatures.  Such was not his destiny.  There was something
about him which looked as if he would not take bullying kindly.  He had
also the advantage of being acquainted with most of those ingenious
devices by which the proverbial inconstancy of fortune is steadied to
something more nearly approaching fixed laws, and the dangerous risks
which have so often led young men to ruin and suicide are practically
reduced to somewhat less than nothing.  So that Mr. Richard Veneer worked
off his nervous energies without any troublesome adventure, and was ready
to return to Rockland in less than a week, without having lightened the
money-belt he wore round his body, or tarnished the long glittering knife
he carried in his boot.

Dick had sent his trunk to the nearest town through which the railroad
leading to the city passed.  He rode off on his black horse and left him
at the place where he took the cars.  On arriving at the city station, he
took a coach and drove to one of the great hotels. Thither drove also a
sagacious-looking, middle-aged man, who entered his name as "W. Thompson"
in the book at the office immediately after that of "R. Venner."  Mr.
"Thompson" kept a carelessly observant eye upon Mr. Venner during his
stay at the hotel, and followed him to the cars when he left, looking
over his shoulder when he bought his ticket at the station, and seeing
him fairly off without obtruding himself in any offensive way upon his
attention. Mr. Thompson, known in other quarters as Detective Policeman
Terry, got very little by his trouble.  Richard Venner did not turn out
to be the wife-poisoner, the defaulting cashier, the river-pirate, or the
great counterfeiter.  He paid his hotel-bill as a gentleman should always
do, if he has the money and can spare it.  The detective had probably
overrated his own sagacity when he ventured to suspect Mr. Venner.  He
reported to his chief that there was a knowing-looking fellow he had been
round after, but he rather guessed he was nothing more than "one o' them
Southern sportsmen."

The poor fellows at the stable where Dick had left his horse had had
trouble enough with him.  One of the ostlers was limping about with a
lame leg, and another had lost a mouthful of his coat, which came very
near carrying a piece of his shoulder with it.  When Mr. Venner came back
for his beast, he was as wild as if he had just been lassoed, screaming,
kicking, rolling over to get rid of his saddle, and when his rider was at
last mounted, jumping about in a way to dislodge any common horseman.  To
all this Dick replied by sticking his long spurs deeper and deeper into
his flanks, until the creature found he was mastered, and dashed off as
if all the thistles of the Pampas were pricking him.

"One more gallop, Juan?"  This was in the last mile of the road before he
came to the town which brought him in sight of the mansion-house.  It was
in this last gallop that the fiery mustang and his rider flashed by the
old Doctor.  Cassia pointed her sharp ears and shied to let them pass.
The Doctor turned and looked through the little round glass in the back
of his sulky.

"Dick Turpin, there, will find more than his match!" said the Doctor.




CHAPTER XII.

THE APOLLINEAN INSTITUTE. (With Extracts from the "Report of the
committee.")

The readers of this narrative will hardly expect any elaborate details of
the educational management of the Apollinean Institute. They cannot be
supposed to take the same interest in its affairs as was shown by the
Annual Committees who reported upon its condition and prospects.  As
these Committees were, however, an important part of the mechanism of the
establishment, some general account of their organization and a few
extracts from the Report of the one last appointed may not be out of
place.

Whether Mr. Silas Peckham had some contrivance for packing his
Committees, whether they happened always to be made up of optimists by
nature, whether they were cajoled into good-humor by polite attentions,
or whether they were always really delighted with the wonderful
acquirements of the pupils and the admirable order of the school, it is
certain that their Annual Reports were couched in language which might
warm the heart of the most cold-blooded and calculating father that ever
had a family of daughters to educate. In fact, these Annual Reports were
considered by Mr. Peckham as his most effective advertisements.

The first thing, therefore, was to see that the Committee was made up of
persons known to the public.

Some worn-out politician, in that leisurely and amiable transition-state
which comes between official extinction and the paralysis which will
finish him as soon as his brain gets a little softer, made an admirable
Chairman for Mr. Peckham, when he had the luck to pick up such an
article.  Old reputations, like old fashions, are more prized in the
grassy than in the stony districts.  An effete celebrity, who would never
be heard of again in the great places until the funeral sermon waked up
his memory for one parting spasm, finds himself in full flavor of renown
a little farther back from the changing winds of the sea-coast.  If such
a public character was not to be had, so that there was no chance of
heading the Report with the name of the Honorable Mr. Somebody, the next
best thing was to get the Reverend Dr. Somebody to take that conspicuous
position.  Then would follow two or three local worthies with Esquire
after their names.  If any stray literary personage from one of the great
cities happened to be within reach, he was pounced upon by Mr. Silas
Peckham.  It was a hard case for the poor man, who had travelled a
hundred miles or two to the outside suburbs after peace and unwatered
milk, to be pumped for a speech in this unexpected way.  It was harder
still, if he had been induced to venture a few tremulous remarks, to be
obliged to write them out for the "Rockland Weekly Universe," with the
chance of seeing them used as an advertising certificate as long as he
lived, if he lived as long as the late Dr. Waterhouse did after giving
his certificate in favor of Whitwell's celebrated Cephalic Snuff.

The Report of the last Committee had been signed by the Honorable,
___________late __________ of ____________, as Chairman. (It is with
reluctance that the name and titles are left in blank; but our public
characters are so familiarly known to the whole community that this
reserve becomes necessary.)  The other members of the Committee were the
Reverend Mr. Butters, of a neighboring town, who was to make the prayer
before the Exercises of the Exhibition, and two or three notabilities of
Rockland, with geoponic eyes, and glabrous, bumpless foreheads.  A few
extracts from the Report are subjoined:

"The Committee have great pleasure in recording their unanimous opinion,
that the Institution was never in so flourishing a condition....

"The health of the pupils is excellent; the admirable quality of food
supplied shows itself in their appearance; their blooming aspect excited
the admiration of the Committee, and bears testimony to the assiduity of
the excellent Matron.

"......moral and religious condition most encouraging, which they cannot
but attribute to the personal efforts and instruction of the faithful
Principal, who considers religious instruction a solemn duty which he
cannot commit to other people.

"......great progress in their studies, under the intelligent
superintendence of the accomplished Principal, assisted by Mr. Badger,
[Mr. Langdon's predecessor,] Miss Darley, the lady who superintends the
English branches, Miss Crabs, her assistant and teacher of Modern
Languages, and Mr. Schneider, teacher of French, German, Latin, and
Music....

"Education is the great business of the Institute.  Amusements are
objects of a secondary nature; but these are by no means neglected....

"......English compositions of great originality and beauty, creditable
alike to the head and heart of their accomplished authors.... several
poems of a very high order of merit, which would do honor to the
literature of any age or country.... life-like drawings, showing great
proficiency....  Many converse fluently in various modern languages....
perform the most difficult airs with the skill of professional
musicians....

"......advantages unsurpassed, if equalled by those of any Institution in
the country, and reflecting the highest honor on the distinguished Head
of the Establishment, SILAS PECKHAM, Esquire, and his admirable Lady, the
MATRON, with their worthy assistants...."

The perusal of this Report did Mr. Bernard more good than a week's
vacation would have done: It gave him such a laugh as he had not had for
a month.  The way in which Silas Peckham had made his Committee say what
he wanted them to--for he recognized a number of expressions in the
Report as coming directly from the lips of his principal, and could not
help thinking how cleverly he had forced his phrases, as jugglers do the
particular card they wish their dupe to take--struck him as particularly
neat and pleasing.

He had passed through the sympathetic and emotional stages in his new
experience, and had arrived at the philosophical and practical state,
which takes things coolly, and goes to work to set them right.  He had
breadth enough of view to see that there was nothing so very exceptional
in this educational trader's dealings with his subordinates, but he had
also manly feeling enough to attack the particular individual instance of
wrong before him.  There are plenty of dealer's in morals, as in ordinary
traffic, who confine themselves to wholesale business.  They leave the
small necessity of their next-door neighbor to the retailers, who are
poorer in statistics and general facts, but richer in the every-day
charities.  Mr. Bernard felt, at first, as one does who sees a gray rat
steal out of a drain and begin gnawing at the bark of some tree loaded
with fruit or blossoms, which he will soon girdle, if he is let alone.
The first impulse is to murder him with the nearest ragged stone.  Then
one remembers that he is a rodent, acting after the law of his kind, and
cools down and is contented to drive him off and guard the tree against
his teeth for the future.  As soon as this is done, one can watch his
attempts at mischief with a certain amusement.

This was the kind of process Mr. Bernard had gone through.  First, the
indignant surprise of a generous nature, when it comes unexpectedly into
relations with a mean one.  Then the impulse of extermination,--a divine
instinct, intended to keep down vermin of all classes to their working
averages in the economy of Nature.  Then a return of cheerful
tolerance,--a feeling, that, if the Deity could bear with rats and
sharpers, he could; with a confident trust, that, in the long run,
terriers and honest men would have the upperhand, and a grateful
consciousness that he had been sent just at the right time to come
between a patient victim and the master who held her in peonage.

Having once made up his mind what to do, Mr. Bernard was as good-natured
and hopeful as ever.  He had the great advantage, from his professional
training, of knowing how to recognize and deal with the nervous
disturbances to which overtasked women are so liable.  He saw well enough
that Helen Darley would certainly kill herself or lose her wits, if he
could not lighten her labors and lift off a large part of her weight of
cares.  The worst of it was, that she was one of those women who
naturally overwork themselves, like those horses who will go at the top
of their pace until they drop.  Such women are dreadfully unmanageable.
It is as hard reasoning with them as it would have been reasoning with
Io, when she was flying over land and sea, driven by the sting of the
never-sleeping gadfly.

This was a delicate, interesting game that he played.  Under one innocent
pretext or another, he invaded this or that special province she had made
her own.  He would collect the themes and have them all read and marked,
answer all the puzzling questions in mathematics, make the other teachers
come to him for directions, and in this way gradually took upon himself
not only all the general superintendence that belonged to his office, but
stole away so many of the special duties which might fairly have belonged
to his assistant, that, before she knew it, she was looking better and
feeling more cheerful than for many and many a month before.

When the nervous energy is depressed by any bodily cause, or exhausted by
overworking, there follow effects which have often been misinterpreted by
moralists, and especially by theologians.  The conscience itself becomes
neuralgic, sometimes actually inflamed, so that the least touch is agony.
Of all liars and false accusers, a sick conscience is the most inventive
and indefatigable.  The devoted daughter, wife, mother, whose life has
been given to unselfish labors, who has filled a place which it seems to
others only an angel would make good, reproaches herself with
incompetence and neglect of duty.  The humble Christian, who has been a
model to others, calls himself a worm of the dust on one page of his
diary, and arraigns himself on the next for coming short of the
perfection of an archangel.

Conscience itself requires a conscience, or nothing can be more
unscrupulous.  It told Saul that he did well in persecuting the
Christians.  It has goaded countless multitudes of various creeds to
endless forms of self-torture.  The cities of India are full of cripples
it has made.  The hill-sides of Syria are riddled with holes, where
miserable hermits, whose lives it had palsied, lived and died like the
vermin they harbored.  Our libraries are crammed with books written by
spiritual hypochondriacs, who inspected all their moral secretions a
dozen times a day.  They are full of interest, but they should be
transferred from the shelf of the theologian to that of the medical man
who makes a study of insanity.

This was the state into which too much work and too much responsibility
were bringing Helen Darley, when the new master came and lifted so much
of the burden that was crushing her as must be removed before she could
have a chance to recover her natural elasticity and buoyancy.  Many of
the noblest women, suffering like her, but less fortunate in being
relieved at the right moment, die worried out of life by the perpetual
teasing of this inflamed, neuralgic conscience.  So subtile is the line
which separates the true and almost angelic sensibility of a healthy, but
exalted nature, from the soreness of a soul which is sympathizing with a
morbid state of the body that it is no wonder they are often confounded.
And thus many good women are suffered to perish by that form of
spontaneous combustion in which the victim goes on toiling day and night
with the hidden fire consuming her, until all at once her cheek whitens,
and, as we look upon her, she drops away, a heap of ashes.  The more they
overwork themselves, the more exacting becomes the sense of duty,--as the
draught of the locomotive's furnace blows stronger and makes the fire
burn more fiercely, the faster it spins along the track.

It is not very likely, as was said at the beginning of this chapter, that
we shall trouble ourselves a great deal about the internal affairs of the
Apollinean Institute.  These schools are, in the nature of things, not so
very unlike each other as to require a minute description for each
particular one among them.  They have all very much the same general
features, pleasing and displeasing.  All feeding-establishments have
something odious about them,--from the wretched country-houses where
paupers are farmed out to the lowest bidder, up to the commons-tables at
colleges and even the fashionable boarding-house.  A person's appetite
should be at war with no other purse than his own.  Young people,
especially, who have a bone-factory at work in them, and have to feed the
living looms of innumerable growing tissues, should be provided for, if
possible, by those who love them like their own flesh and blood.
Elsewhere their appetites will be sure to make them enemies, or, what are
almost as bad, friends whose interests are at variance with the claims of
their exacting necessities and demands.

Besides, all commercial transactions in regard to the most sacred
interests of life are hateful even to those who profit by them.  The
clergyman, the physician, the teacher, must be paid; but each of them, if
his duty be performed in the true spirit, can hardly help a shiver of
disgust when money is counted out to him for administering the
consolations of religion, for saving some precious life, for sowing the
seeds of Christian civilization in young ingenuous souls.

And yet all these schools, with their provincial French and their
mechanical accomplishments, with their cheap parade of diplomas and
commencements and other public honors, have an ever fresh interest to all
who see the task they are performing in our new social order. These girls
are not being educated for governesses, or to be exported, with other
manufactured articles, to colonies where there happens to be a surplus of
males.  Most of them will be wives, and every American-born husband is a
possible President of these United States.  Any one of these girls may be
a four-years' queen.  There is no sphere of human activity so exalted
that she may not be called upon to fill it.

But there is another consideration of far higher interest.  The education
of our community to all that is beautiful is flowing in mainly through
its women, and that to a considerable extent by the aid of these large
establishments, the least perfect of which do something to stimulate the
higher tastes and partially instruct them. Sometimes there is, perhaps,
reason to fear that girls will be too highly educated for their own
happiness, if they are lifted by their culture out of the range of the
practical and every-day working youth by whom they are surrounded.  But
this is a risk we must take.  Our young men come into active life so
early, that, if our girls were not educated to something beyond mere
practical duties, our material prosperity would outstrip our culture; as
it often does in large places where money is made too rapidly.  This is
the meaning, therefore, of that somewhat ambitious programme common to
most of these large institutions, at which we sometimes smile, perhaps
unwisely or uncharitably.

We shall take it for granted that the routine of instruction went on at
the Apollinean Institute much as it does in other schools of the same
class.  People, young or old, are wonderfully different, if we contrast
extremes in pairs.  They approach much nearer, if we take them in groups
of twenty.  Take two separate hundreds as they come, without choosing,
and you get the gamut of human character in both so completely that you
can strike many chords in each which shall be in perfect unison with
corresponding ones in the other.  If we go a step farther, and compare
the population of two villages of the same race and region, there is such
a regularly graduated distribution and parallelism of character, that it
seems as if Nature must turn out human beings in sets like chessmen.

It must be confessed that the position in which Mr. Bernard now found
himself had a pleasing danger about it which might well justify all the
fears entertained on his account by more experienced friends, when they
learned that he was engaged in a Young Ladies' Seminary. The school never
went on more smoothly than during the first period of his administration,
after he had arranged its duties, and taken his share, and even more than
his share, upon himself.  But human nature does not wait for the diploma
of the Apollinean Institute to claim the exercise of it, instincts and
faculties.  These young girls saw but little of the youth of the
neighborhood.  The mansion-house young men were off at college or in the
cities, or making love to each other's sisters, or at any rate
unavailable for some reason or other.  There were a few "clerks,"--that
is, young men who attended shops, commonly called "stores,"--who were
fond of walking by the Institute, when they were off duty, for the sake
of exchanging a word or a glance with any one of the young ladies they
might happen to know, if any such were stirring abroad: crude young men,
mostly, with a great many "Sirs" and "Ma'ams" in their speech, and with
that style of address sometimes acquired in the retail business, as if
the salesman were recommending himself to a customer, "First-rate family
article, Ma'am; warranted to wear a lifetime; just one yard and three
quarters in this pattern, Ma'am; sha'n't I have the pleasure?" and so
forth.  If there had been ever so many of them, and if they had been ever
so fascinating, the quarantine of the Institute was too rigorous to allow
any romantic infection to be introduced from without.

Anybody might see what would happen, with a good-looking, well-dressed,
well-bred young man, who had the authority of a master, it is true, but
the manners of a friend and equal, moving about among these young girls
day after day, his eyes meeting theirs, his breath mingling with theirs,
his voice growing familiar to them, never in any harsh tones, often
soothing, encouraging, always sympathetic, with its male depth and
breadth of sound among the chorus of trebles, as if it were a river in
which a hundred of these little piping streamlets-might lose themselves;
anybody might see what would happen.  Young girls wrote home to their
parents that they enjoyed themselves much, this term, at the Institute,
and thought they were making rapid progress in their studies.  There was
a great enthusiasm for the young master's reading-classes in English
poetry.  Some of the poor little things began to adorn themselves with an
extra ribbon, or a bit of such jewelry as they had before kept for great
occasions.  Dear souls! they only half knew what they were doing it for.
Does the bird know why its feathers grow more brilliant and its voice
becomes musical in the pairing season?

And so, in the midst of this quiet inland town, where a mere accident had
placed Mr. Bernard Langdon, there was a concentration of explosive
materials which might at any time change its Arcadian and academic repose
into a scene of dangerous commotion.  What said Helen Darley, when she
saw with her woman's glance that more than one girl, when she should be
looking at her book, was looking over it toward the master's desk?  Was
her own heart warmed by any livelier feeling than gratitude, as its life
began to flow with fuller pulses, and the morning sky again looked bright
and the flowers recovered their lost fragrance?  Was there any strange,
mysterious affinity between the master and the dark girl who sat by
herself?  Could she call him at will by looking at him?  Could it be
that--?  It made her shiver to think of it.--And who was that strange
horseman who passed Mr. Bernard at dusk the other evening, looking so
like Mephistopheles galloping hard to be in season at the witches'
Sabbath-gathering? That must be the cousin of Elsie's who wants to marry
her, they say. A dangerous-looking fellow for a rival, if one took a
fancy to the dark girl!  And who is she, and what?--by what demon is she
haunted, by what taint is she blighted, by what curse is she followed, by
what destiny is she marked, that her strange beauty has such a terror in
it, and that hardly one shall dare to love her, and her eye glitters
always, but warms for none?

Some of these questions are ours.  Some were Helen Darley's.  Some of
them mingled with the dreams of Bernard Langdon, as he slept the night
after meeting the strange horseman.  In the morning he happened to be a
little late in entering the schoolroom.  There was something between the
leaves of the Virgil which lay upon his desk.  He opened it and saw a
freshly gathered mountain-flower.  He looked at Elsie, instinctively,
involuntarily.  She had another such flower on her breast.

A young girl's graceful compliment,--that is all,--no doubt,--no doubt.
It was odd that the flower should have happened to be laid between the
leaves of the Fourth Book of the "AEneid," and at this line,

          "Incipit effari, mediaque in voce resistit."

A remembrance of an ancient superstition flashed through the master's
mind, and he determined to try the Sortes Virgilianae.  He shut the
volume, and opened it again at a venture.--The story of Laocoon!

He read with a strange feeling of unwilling fascination, from "Horresco
referees" to "Bis medium amplexi," and flung the book from him, as if its
leaves had been steeped in the subtle poisons that princes die of.




CHAPTER XIII.

CURIOSITY.

People will talk.  'Ciascun lo dice' is a tune that is played oftener
than the national air of this country or any other.

"That 's what they say.  Means to marry her, if she is his cousin. Got
money himself,--that 's the story,--but wants to come and live in the old
place, and get the Dudley property by and by."  "Mother's folks was
wealthy."--"Twenty-three to twenty-five year old."--"He a'n't more 'n
twenty, or twenty-one at the outside."--"Looks as if he knew too much to
be only twenty year old."--"Guess he's been through the mill,--don't look
so green, anyhow, hey?  Did y' ever mind that cut over his left eyebrow?"

So they gossiped in Rockland.  The young fellows could make nothing of
Dick Venner.  He was shy and proud with the few who made advances to him.
The young ladies called him handsome and romantic, but he looked at them
like a many-tailed pacha who was in the habit of, ordering his wives by
the dozen.

"What do you think of the young man over there at the Veneers'?" said
Miss Arabella Thornton to her father.

"Handsome," said the Judge, "but dangerous-looking.  His face is
indictable at common law.  Do you know, my dear, I think there is a blank
at the Sheriff's office, with a place for his name in it?"

The Judge paused and looked grave, as if he had just listened to the
verdict of the jury and was going to pronounce sentence.

"Have you heard anything against him?"  said the Judge's daughter.

"Nothing.  But I don't like these mixed bloods and half-told stories.
Besides, I have seen a good many desperate fellows at the bar, and I have
a fancy they all have a look belonging to them.  The worst one I ever
sentenced looked a good deal like this fellow.  A wicked mouth. All our
other features are made for us; but a man makes his own mouth."

"Who was the person you sentenced?"

"He was a young fellow that undertook to garrote a man who had won his
money at cards.  The same slender shape, the same cunning, fierce look,
smoothed over with a plausible air.  Depend upon it, there is an
expression in all the sort of people who live by their wits when they
can, and by worse weapons when their wits fail them, that we old
law-doctors know just as well as the medical counsellors know the marks
of disease in a man's face.  Dr. Kittredge looks at a man and says he is
going to die; I look at another man and say he is going to be hanged, if
nothing happens.  I don't say so of this one, but I don't like his looks.
I wonder Dudley Veneer takes to him so kindly."

"It's all for Elsie's sake," said Miss Thornton.  "I feel quite sure of
that.  He never does anything that is not meant for her in some way.  I
suppose it amuses her to have her cousin about the house. She rides a
good deal since he has been here.  Have you seen them galloping about
together?  He looks like my idea of a Spanish bandit on that wild horse
of his."

"Possibly he has been one,--or is one," said the Judge,--smiling as men
smile whose lips have often been freighted with the life and death of
their fellow-creatures.  "I met them riding the other day. Perhaps Dudley
is right, if it pleases her to have a companion.  What will happen,
though, if he makes love to her?  Will Elsie be easily taken with such a
fellow?  You young folks are supposed to know more about these matters
than we middle-aged people."

"Nobody can tell.  Elsie is not like anybody else.  The girls who have
seen most of her think she hates men, all but 'Dudley,' as she calls her
father.  Some of them doubt whether she loves him.  They doubt whether
she can love anything human, except perhaps the old black woman who has
taken care of her since she was a baby.  The village people have the
strangest stories about her; you know what they call her?"

She whispered three words in her father's ear.  The Judge changed color
as she spoke, sighed deeply, and was silent as if lost in thought for a
moment.

"I remember her mother," he said, "so well!  A sweeter creature never
lived.  Elsie has something of her in her look, but those are not her
mother's eyes.  They were dark, but soft, as in all I ever saw of her
race.  Her father's are dark too, but mild, and even tender, I should
say.  I don't know what there is about Elsie's,--but do you know, my
dear, I find myself curiously influenced by them?  I have had to face a
good many sharp eyes and hard ones,--murderers' eyes and pirates',--men
who had to be watched in the bar, where they stood on trial, for fear
they should spring on the prosecuting officers like tigers,--but I never
saw such eyes as Elsie's; and yet they have a kind of drawing virtue or
power about them,--I don't know what else to call it: have you never
observed this?"

His daughter smiled in her turn.

"Never observed it?  Why, of course, nobody could be with Elsie Venner
and not observe it.  There are a good many other strange things about
her: did you ever notice how she dresses?"

"Why, handsomely enough, I should think," the Judge answered.  "I suppose
she dresses as she likes, and sends to the city for what she wants.  What
do you mean in particular?  We men notice effects in dress, but not much
in detail."

"You never noticed the colors and patterns of her dresses?  You never
remarked anything curious about her ornaments?  Well!  I don't believe
you men know, half the time, whether a lady wears a nine-penny collar or
a thread-lace cape worth a thousand dollars.  I don't believe you know a
silk dress from a bombazine one.  I don't believe you can tell whether a
woman is in black or in colors, unless you happen to know she is a widow.
Elsie Venner has a strange taste in dress, let me tell you.  She sends
for the oddest patterns of stuffs, and picks out the most curious things
at the jeweller's, whenever she goes to town with her father.  They say
the old Doctor tells him to let her have her way about such matters.
Afraid of her mind, if she is contradicted, I suppose.  You've heard
about her going to school at that place,--the 'Institoot,' as those
people call it?  They say she's bright enough in her way,--has studied at
home, you know, with her father a good deal, knows some modern languages
and Latin, I believe: at any rate, she would have it so,--she must go to
the 'Institoot.'  They have a very good female teacher there, I hear; and
the new master, that young Mr. Langdon, looks and talks like a
well-educated young man.  I wonder what they 'll make of Elsie, between
them!"

So they talked at the Judge's, in the calm, judicial-looking
mansion-house, in the grave, still library, with the troops of wan-hued
law-books staring blindly out of their titles at them as they talked,
like the ghosts of dead attorneys fixed motionless and speechless, each
with a thin, golden film over his unwinking eyes.

In the mean time, everything went on quietly enough after Cousin
Richard's return.  A man of sense,--that is, a man who knows perfectly
well that a cool head is worth a dozen warm hearts in carrying the
fortress of a woman's affections, (not yours, "Astarte," nor yours,
"Viola,")--who knows that men are rejected by women every day because
they, the men, love them, and are accepted every day because they do not,
and therefore can study the arts of pleasing,--a man of sense, when he
finds he has established his second parallel too soon, retires quietly to
his first, and begins working on his covered ways again.  The whole art
of love may be read in any Encyclopaedia under the title Fortification,
where the terms just used are explained.  After the little adventure of
the necklace, Dick retreated at once to his first parallel.  Elsie loved
riding,--and would go off with him on a gallop now and then.  He was a
master of all those strange Indian horseback-feats which shame the tricks
of the circus-riders, and used to astonish and almost amuse her sometimes
by disappearing from his saddle, like a phantom horseman lying flat
against the side of the bounding creature that bore him, as if he were a
hunting leopard with his claws in the horse's flank and flattening
himself out against his heaving ribs.  Elsie knew a little Spanish too,
which she had learned from the young person who had taught her dancing,
and Dick enlarged her vocabulary with a few soft phrases, and would sing
her a song sometimes, touching the air upon an ancient-looking guitar
they had found with the ghostly things in the garret,--a quaint old
instrument, marked E. M. on the back, and supposed to have belonged to a
certain Elizabeth Mascarene, before mentioned in connection with a work
of art,--a fair, dowerless lady, who smiled and sung and faded away,
unwedded, a hundred years ago, as dowerless ladies, not a few, are
smiling and singing and fading now,--God grant each of them His
love,--and one human heart as its interpreter!

As for school, Elsie went or stayed away as she liked.  Sometimes, when
they thought she was at her desk in the great schoolroom, she would be on
The Mountain,--alone always.  Dick wanted to go with her, but she would
never let him.  Once, when she had followed the zigzag path a little way
up, she looked back and caught a glimpse of him following her.  She
turned and passed him without a word, but giving him a look which seemed
to make the scars on his wrist tingle, went to her room, where she locked
herself up, and did not come out again till evening, Old Sophy having
brought her food, and set it down, not speaking, but looking into her
eyes inquiringly, like a dumb beast trying to feel out his master's will
in his face.  The evening was clear and the moon shining.  As Dick sat at
his chamber-window, looking at the mountain-side, he saw a gray-dressed
figure flit between the trees and steal along the narrow path which led
upward. Elsie's pillow was unpressed that night, but she had not been
missed by the household,--for Dick knew enough to keep his own counsel.
The next morning she avoided him and went off early to school.  It was
the same morning that the young master found the flower between the
leaves of his Virgil.

The girl got over her angry fit, and was pleasant enough with her cousin
for a few days after this; but she shunned rather than sought him.  She
had taken a new interest in her books, and especially in certain poetical
readings which the master conducted with the elder scholars.  This gave
Master Langdon a good chance to study her ways when her eye was on her
book, to notice the inflections of her voice, to watch for any expression
of her sentiments; for, to tell the truth, he had a kind of fear that the
girl had taken a fancy to him, and, though she interested him, he did not
wish to study her heart from the inside.

The more he saw her, the more the sadness of her beauty wrought upon him.
She looked as if she might hate, but could not love.  She hardly smiled
at anything, spoke rarely, but seemed to feel that her natural power of
expression lay all in her bright eyes, the force of which so many had
felt, but none perhaps had tried to explain to themselves.  A person
accustomed to watch the faces of those who were ailing in body or mind,
and to search in every line and tint for some underlying source of
disorder, could hardly help analyzing the impression such a face produced
upon him.  The light of those beautiful eyes was like the lustre of ice;
in all her features there was nothing of that human warmth which shows
that sympathy has reached the soul beneath the mask of flesh it wears.
The look was that of remoteness, of utter isolation.  There was in its
stony apathy, it seemed to him, the pathos which we find in the blind who
show no film or speck over the organs of sight; for Nature had meant her
to be lovely, and left out nothing but love.  And yet the master could
not help feeling that some instinct was working in this girl which was in
some way leading her to seek his presence.  She did not lift her
glittering eyes upon him as at first.  It seemed strange that she did
not, for they were surely her natural weapons of conquest.  Her color did
not come and go like that of young girls under excitement.  She had a
clear brunette complexion, a little sun-touched, it may be,--for the
master noticed once, when her necklace was slightly displaced, that a
faint ring or band of a little lighter shade than the rest of the surface
encircled her neck.  What was the slight peculiarity of her enunciation,
when she read?  Not a lisp, certainly, but the least possible
imperfection in articulating some of the lingual sounds,--just enough to
be noticed at first, and quite forgotten after being a few times heard.

Not a word about the flower on either side.  It was not uncommon for the
schoolgirls to leave a rose or pink or wild flower on the teacher's desk.
Finding it in the Virgil was nothing, after all; it was a little delicate
flower, which looked as if it were made to press, and it was probably
shut in by accident at the particular place where he found it.  He took
it into his head to examine it in a botanical point of view.  He found it
was not common,--that it grew only in certain localities,--and that one
of these was among the rocks of the eastern spur of The Mountain.

It happened to come into his head how the Swiss youth climb the sides of
the Alps to find the flower called the Edelweiss for the maidens whom
they wish to please.  It is a pretty fancy, that of scaling some
dangerous height before the dawn, so as to gather the flower in its
freshness, that the favored maiden may wear it to church on Sunday
morning, a proof at once of her lover's devotion and his courage. Mr.
Bernard determined to explore the region where this flower was said to
grow, that he might see where the wild girl sought the blossoms of which
Nature was so jealous.

It was on a warm, fair Saturday afternoon that he undertook his
land-voyage of discovery.  He had more curiosity, it may be, than he
would have owned; for he had heard of the girl's wandering habits, and
the guesses about her sylvan haunts, and was thinking what the chances
were that he should meet her in some strange place, or come upon traces
of her which would tell secrets she would not care to have known.

The woods are all alive to one who walks through them with his mind in an
excited state, and his eyes and ears wide open.  The trees are always
talking, not merely whispering with their leaves, (for every tree talks
to itself in that way, even when it stands alone in the middle of a
pasture,) but grating their boughs against each other, as old horn-handed
farmers press their dry, rustling palms together, dropping a nut or a
leaf or a twig, clicking to the tap of a woodpecker, or rustling as a
squirrel flashes along a branch.  It was now the season of singing-birds,
and the woods were haunted with mysterious, tender music.  The voices of
the birds which love the deeper shades of the forest are sadder than
those of the open fields: these are the nuns who have taken the veil, the
hermits that have hidden themselves away from the world and tell their
griefs to the infinite listening Silences of the wilderness,--for the one
deep inner silence that Nature breaks with her fitful superficial sounds
becomes multiplied as the image of a star in ruffled waters. Strange!
The woods at first convey the impression of profound repose, and yet, if
you watch their ways with open ear, you find the life which is in them is
restless and nervous as that of a woman: the little twigs are crossing
and twining and separating like slender fingers that cannot be still; the
stray leaf is to be flattened into its place like a truant curl; the
limbs sway and twist, impatient of their constrained attitude; and the
rounded masses of foliage swell upward and subside from time to time with
long soft sighs, and, it may be, the falling of a few rain-drops which
had lain hidden among the deeper shadows.  I pray you, notice, in the
sweet summer days which will soon see you among the mountains, this
inward tranquillity that belongs to the heart of the woodland, with this
nervousness, for I do not know what else to call it, of outer movement.
One would say, that Nature, like untrained persons, could not sit still
without nestling about or doing something with her limbs or features, and
that high breeding was only to be looked for in trim gardens, where the
soul of the trees is ill at ease perhaps, but their manners are
unexceptionable, and a rustling branch or leaf falling out of season is
an indecorum.  The real forest is hardly still except in the Indian
summer; then there is death in the house, and they are waiting for the
sharp shrunken months to come with white raiment for the summer's burial.

There were many hemlocks in this neighborhood, the grandest and most
solemn of all the forest-trees in the mountain regions.  Up to a certain
period of growth they are eminently beautiful, their boughs disposed in
the most graceful pagoda-like series of close terraces, thick and dark
with green crystalline leaflets.  In spring the tender shoots come out of
a paler green, finger-like, as if they were pointing to the violets at
their feet.  But when the trees have grown old, and their rough boles
measure a yard and more through their diameter, they are no longer
beautiful, but they have a sad solemnity all their own, too full of
meaning to require the heart's comment to be framed in words.  Below, all
their earthward-looking branches are sapless and shattered, splintered by
the weight of many winters' snows; above, they are still green and full
of life, but their summits overtop all the deciduous trees around them,
and in their companionship with heaven they are alone.  On these the
lightning loves to fall.  One such Mr. Bernard saw,--or rather, what had
been one such; for the bolt had torn the tree like an explosion from
within, and the ground was strewed all around the broken stump with
flakes of rough bark and strips and chips of shivered wood, into which
the old tree had been rent by the bursting rocket from the thunder-cloud.

--The master had struck up The Mountain obliquely from the western side
of the Dudley mansion-house.  In this way he ascended until he reached a
point many hundred feet above the level of the plain, and commanding all
the country beneath and around.  Almost at his feet he saw the
mansion-house, the chimney standing out of the middle of the roof, or
rather, like a black square hole in it,--the trees almost directly over
their stems, the fences as lines, the whole nearly as an architect would
draw a ground-plan of the house and the inclosures round it.  It
frightened him to see how the huge masses of rock and old forest-growths
hung over the home below.  As he descended a little and drew near the
ledge of evil name, he was struck with the appearance of a long narrow
fissure that ran parallel with it and above it for many rods, not
seemingly of very old standing,--for there were many fibres of roots
which had evidently been snapped asunder when the rent took place, and
some of which were still succulent in both separated portions.

Mr. Bernard had made up his mind, when he set forth, not to come back
before he had examined the dreaded ledge. He had half persuaded himself
that it was scientific curiosity. He wished to examine the rocks, to see
what flowers grew there, and perhaps to pick up an adventure in the
zoological line; for he had on a pair of high, stout boots, and he
carried a stick in his hand, which was forked at one extremity, so as to
be very convenient to hold down a crotalus with, if he should happen to
encounter one.  He knew the aspect of the ledge from a distance; for its
bald and leprous-looking declivities stood out in their nakedness from
the wooded sides of The Mountain, when this was viewed from certain
points of the village.  But the nearer aspect of the blasted region had
something frightful in it. The cliffs were water-worn, as if they had
been gnawed for thousands of years by hungry waves.  In some places they
overhung their base so as to look like leaning towers which might topple
over at any minute. In other parts they were scooped into niches or
caverns.  Here and there they were cracked in deep fissures, some of them
of such width that one might enter them, if he cared to run the risk of
meeting the regular tenants, who might treat him as an intruder.

Parts of the ledge were cloven perpendicularly, with nothing but cracks
or slightly projecting edges in which or on which a foot could find hold.
High up on one of these precipitous walls of rock he saw some tufts of
flowers, and knew them at once for the same that he had found between the
leaves of his Virgil.  Not there, surely!  No woman would have clung
against that steep, rough parapet to gather an idle blossom.  And yet the
master looked round everywhere, and even up the side of that rock, to see
if there were no signs of a woman's footstep. He peered about curiously,
as if his eye might fall on some of those fragments of dress which women
leave after them, whenever they run against each other or against
anything else,--in crowded ballrooms, in the brushwood after picnics, on
the fences after rambles, scattered round over every place which has
witnessed an act of violence, where rude hands have been laid upon them.
Nothing--Stop, though, one moment.  That stone is smooth and polished,
as if it had been somewhat worn by the pressure of human feet.  There is
one twig broken among the stems of that clump of shrubs.  He put his foot
upon the stone and took hold of the close-clinging shrub.  In this way he
turned a sharp angle of the rock and found himself on a natural platform,
which lay in front of one of the wider fissures,--whether the mouth of a
cavern or not he could not yet tell.  A flat stone made an easy seat,
upon which he sat down, as he was very glad to do, and looked
mechanically about him.  A small fragment splintered from the rock was at
his feet.  He took it and threw it down the declivity a little below
where he sat.  He looked about for a stem or a straw of some kind to bite
upon,--a country-instinct,--relic, no doubt, of the old
vegetable-feeding habits of Eden.  Is that a stem or a straw?  He picked
it up.  It was a hair-pin.

To say that Mr. Langdon had a strange sort of thrill shoot through him at
the sight of this harmless little implement would be a statement not at
variance with the fact of the case.  That smooth stone had been often
trodden, and by what foot he could not doubt. He rose up from his seat to
look round for other signs of a woman's visits.  What if there is a
cavern here, where she has a retreat, fitted up, perhaps, as anchorites
fitted their cells,--nay, it may be, carpeted and mirrored, and with one
of those tiger-skins for a couch, such as they, say the girl loves to lie
on?  Let us look, at any rate.

Mr. Bernard walked to the mouth of the cavern or fissure and looked into
it.  His look was met by the glitter of two diamond eyes, small, sharp,
cold, shining out of the darkness, but gliding with a smooth, steady
motion towards the light, and himself.  He stood fixed, struck dumb,
staring back into them with dilating pupils and sudden numbness of fear
that cannot move, as in the terror of dreams.  The two sparks of light
came forward until they grew to circles of flame, and all at once lifted
themselves up as if in angry surprise.  Then for the first time thrilled
in Mr. Bernard's ears the dreadful sound that nothing which breathes, be
it man or brute, can hear unmoved,--the long, loud, stinging whirr, as
the huge, thick bodied reptile shook his many-jointed rattle and adjusted
his loops for the fatal stroke. His eyes were drawn as with magnets
toward the circles of flame.  His ears rung as in the overture to the
swooning dream of chloroform. Nature was before man with her
anaesthetics: the cat's first shake stupefies the mouse; the lion's first
shake deadens the man's fear and feeling; and the crotalus paralyzes
before he strikes.  He waited as in a trance,--waited as one that longs
to have the blow fall, and all over, as the man who shall be in two
pieces in a second waits for the axe to drop.  But while he looked
straight into the flaming eyes, it seemed to him that they were losing
their light and terror, that they were growing tame and dull; the charm
was dissolving, the numbness was passing away, he could move once more.
He heard a light breathing close to his ear, and, half turning, saw the
face of Elsie Venner, looking motionless into the reptile's eyes, which
had shrunk and faded under the stronger enchantment of her own.




CHAPTER XIV.

FAMILY SECRETS.

It was commonly understood in the town of Rockland that Dudley Venner had
had a great deal of trouble with that daughter of his, so handsome, yet
so peculiar, about whom there were so many strange stories.  There was no
end to the tales which were told of her extraordinary doings.  Yet her
name was never coupled with that of any youth or man, until this cousin
had provoked remark by his visit; and even then it was oftener in the
shape of wondering conjectures whether he would dare to make love to her,
than in any pretended knowledge of their relations to each other, that
the public tongue exercised its village-prerogative of tattle.

The more common version of the trouble at the mansion-house was this:
Elsie was not exactly in her right mind.  Her temper was singular, her
tastes were anomalous, her habits were lawless, her antipathies were many
and intense, and she was liable to explosions of ungovernable anger.
Some said that was not the worst of it.  At nearly fifteen years old,
when she was growing fast, and in an irritable state of mind and body,
she had had a governess placed over her for whom she had conceived an
aversion.  It was whispered among a few who knew more of the family
secrets than others, that, worried and exasperated by the presence and
jealous oversight of this person, Elsie had attempted to get finally rid
of her by unlawful means, such as young girls have been known to employ
in their straits, and to which the sex at all ages has a certain
instinctive tendency, in preference to more palpable instruments for the
righting of its wrongs.  At any rate, this governess had been taken
suddenly ill, and the Doctor had been sent for at midnight.  Old Sophy
had taken her master into a room apart, and said a few words to him which
turned him as white as a sheet.  As soon as he recovered himself, he sent
Sophy out, called in the old Doctor, and gave him some few hints, on
which he acted at once, and had the satisfaction of seeing his patient
out of danger before he left in the morning.  It is proper to say, that,
during the following days, the most thorough search was made in every
nook and cranny of those parts of the house which Elsie chiefly haunted,
but nothing was found which might be accused of having been the
intentional cause of the probably accidental sudden illness of the
governess.  From this time forward her father was never easy.  Should he
keep her apart, or shut her up, for fear of risk to others, and so lose
every chance of restoring her mind to its healthy tone by kindly
influences and intercourse with wholesome natures?  There was no proof,
only presumption, as to the agency of Elsie in the matter referred to.
But the doubt was worse, perhaps, than certainty would have been,--for
then he would have known what to do.

He took the old Doctor as his adviser.  The shrewd old man listened to
the father's story, his explanations of possibilities, of probabilities,
of dangers, of hopes.  When he had got through, the Doctor looked him in
the face steadily, as if he were saying, Is that all?

The father's eyes fell.  This was not all.  There was something at the
bottom of his soul which he could not bear to speak of,--nay, which, as
often as it reared itself through the dark waves of unworded
consciousness into the breathing air of thought, he trod down as the
ruined angels tread down a lost soul, trying to come up out of the
seething sea of torture.  Only this one daughter!  No! God never would
have ordained such a thing.  There was nothing ever heard of like it; it
could not be; she was ill,--she would outgrow all these singularities; he
had had an aunt who was peculiar; he had heard that hysteric girls showed
the strangest forms of moral obliquity for a time, but came right at
last.  She would change all at once, when her health got more firmly
settled in the course of her growth.  Are there not rough buds that open
into sweet flowers?  Are there not fruits, which, while unripe, are not
to be tasted or endured, which mature into the richest taste and
fragrance?  In God's good time she would come to her true nature; her
eyes would lose that frightful, cold glitter; her lips would not feel so
cold when she pressed them against his cheek; and that faint birth-mark,
her mother swooned when she first saw, would fade wholly out,--it was
less marked, surely, now than it used to be!

So Dudley Venner felt, and would have thought, if he had let his thoughts
breathe the air of his soul.  But the Doctor read through words and
thoughts and all into the father's consciousness.  There are states of
mind which may be shared by two persons in presence of each other, which
remain not only unworded, but unthoughted, if such a word may be coined
for our special need.  Such a mutually interpenetrative consciousness
there was between the father and the old physician.  By a common impulse,
both of them rose in a mechanical way and went to the western window,
where each started, as he saw the other's look directed towards the white
stone which stood in the midst of the small plot of green turf.

The Doctor had, for a moment, forgotten himself but he looked up at the
clouds, which were angry, and said, as if speaking of the weather, "It is
dark now, but we hope it will clear up by and by. There are a great many
more clouds than rains, and more rains than strokes of lightning, and
more strokes of lightning than there are people killed.  We must let this
girl of ours have her way, as far as it is safe.  Send away this woman
she hates, quietly.  Get her a foreigner for a governess, if you
can,--one that can dance and sing and will teach her.  In the house old
Sophy will watch her best.  Out of it you must trust her, I am
afraid,--for she will not be followed round, and she is in less danger
than you think.  If she wanders at night, find her, if you can; the woods
are not absolutely safe.  If she will be friendly with any young people,
have them to see her,--young men especially.  She will not love any one
easily, perhaps not at all; yet love would be more like to bring her
right than anything else.  If any young person seems in danger of falling
in love with her, send him to me for counsel."

Dry, hard advice, but given from a kind hewn, with a moist eye, and in
tones which tried to be cheerful and were full of sympathy.  This advice
was the key to the more than indulgent treatment which, as we have seen,
the girl had received from her father and all about her. The old Doctor
often came in, in the kindest, most natural sort of way, got into
pleasant relations with Elsie by always treating her in the same easy
manner as at the great party, encouraging all her harmless fancies, and
rarely reminding her that he was a professional adviser, except when she
came out of her own accord, as in the talk they had at the party, telling
him of some wild trick she had been playing.

"Let her go to the girls' school, by all means," said the Doctor, when
she had begun to talk about it.  "Possibly she may take to some of the
girls or of the teachers.  Anything to interest her. Friendship, love,
religion, whatever will set her nature at work.  We must have headway on,
or there will be no piloting her.  Action first of all, and then we will
see what to do with it."

So, when Cousin Richard came along, the Doctor, though he did not like
his looks any too well, told her father to encourage his staying for a
time.  If she liked him, it was good; if she only tolerated him, it was
better than nothing.

"You know something about that nephew of yours, during these last years,
I suppose?" the Doctor said.  "Looks as if he had seen life. Has a scar
that was made by a sword-cut, and a white spot on the side of his neck
that looks like a bullet-mark.  I think he has been what folks call a
'hard customer.'"

Dudley Venner owned that he had heard little or nothing of him of late
years.  He had invited himself, and of course it would not be decent not
to receive him as a relative.  He thought Elsie rather liked having him
about the house for a while.  She was very capricious,--acted as if she
fancied him one day and disliked him the next.  He did not know,--but
sometimes thought that this nephew of his might take a serious liking to
Elsie.  What should he do about it, if it turned out so?

The Doctor lifted his eyebrows a little.  He thought there was no fear.
Elsie was naturally what they call a man-hater, and there was very little
danger of any sudden passion springing up between two such young persons.
Let him stay awhile; it gives her something to think about.  So he stayed
awhile, as we have seen.

The more Mr. Richard became acquainted with the family,--that is, with
the two persons of whom it consisted,--the more favorably the idea of a
permanent residence in the mansion-house seemed to impress him.  The
estate was large,--hundreds of acres, with woodlands and meadows of great
value.  The father and daughter had been living quietly, and there could
not be a doubt that the property which came through the Dudleys must have
largely increased of late years.  It was evident enough that they had an
abundant income, from the way in which Elsie's caprices were indulged.
She had horses and carriages to suit herself; she sent to the great city
for everything she wanted in the way of dress.  Even her diamonds--and
the young man knew something about these gems--must be of considerable
value; and yet she wore them carelessly, as it pleased her fancy.  She
had precious old laces, too, almost worth their weight in diamonds; laces
which had been snatched from altars in ancient Spanish cathedrals during
the wars, and which it would not be safe to leave a duchess alone with
for ten minutes.  The old house was fat with the deposits of rich
generations which had gone before.  The famous "golden" fire-set was a
purchase of one of the family who had been in France during the
Revolution, and must have come from a princely palace, if not from one of
the royal residences.  As for silver, the iron closet which had been made
in the dining-room wall was running over with it: tea-kettles,
coffee-pots, heavy-lidded tankards, chafing-dishes, punch-bowls, all that
all the Dudleys had ever used, from the caudle-cup which used to be
handed round the young mother's chamber, and the porringer from which
children scooped their bread-and-milk with spoons as solid as ingots, to
that ominous vessel, on the upper shelf, far back in the dark, with a
spout like a slender italic S, out of which the sick and dying, all along
the last century, and since, had taken the last drops that passed their
lips.  Without being much of a scholar, Dick could see well enough, too,
that the books in the library had been ordered from the great London
houses, whose imprint they bore, by persons who knew what was best and
meant to have it.  A man does not require much learning to feel pretty
sure, when he takes one of those solid, smooth, velvet-leaved quartos,
say a Baskerville Addison, for instance, bound in red morocco, with a
margin of gold as rich as the embroidery of a prince's collar, as Vandyck
drew it,--he need not know much to feel pretty sure that a score or two
of shelves full of such books mean that it took a long purse, as well as
a literary taste, to bring them together.

To all these attractions the mind of this thoughtful young gentleman may
be said to have been fully open.  He did not disguise from himself,
however, that there were a number of drawbacks in the way of his becoming
established as the heir of the Dudley mansion-house and fortune.  In the
first place, Cousin Elsie was, unquestionably, very piquant, very
handsome, game as a hawk, and hard to please, which made her worth trying
for.  But then there was something about Cousin Elsie,--(the small, white
scars began stinging, as he said this to himself, and he pushed his
sleeve up to look at them)--there was something about Cousin Elsie he
couldn't make out.  What was the matter with her eyes, that they sucked
your life out of you in that strange way?  What did she always wear a
necklace for?  Had she some such love-token on her neck as the old Don's
revolver had left on his?  How safe would anybody feel to live with her?
Besides, her father would last forever, if he was left to himself.  And
he may take it into his head to marry again.  That would be pleasant!

So talked Cousin Richard to himself, in the calm of the night and in the
tranquillity of his own soul.  There was much to be said on both sides.
It was a balance to be struck after the two columns were added up.  He
struck the balance, and came to the conclusion that he would fall in love
with Elsie Venner.

The intelligent reader will not confound this matured and serious
intention of falling in love with the young lady with that mere impulse
of the moment before mentioned as an instance of making love. On the
contrary, the moment Mr. Richard had made up his mind that he should fall
in love with Elsie, he began to be more reserved with her, and to try to
make friends in other quarters.  Sensible men, you know, care very little
what a girl's present fancy is.  The question is: Who manages her, and
how can you get at that person or those persons?  Her foolish little
sentiments are all very well in their way; but business is business, and
we can't stop for such trifles. The old political wire-pullers never go
near the man they want to gain, if they can help it; they find out who
his intimates and managers are, and work through them.  Always handle any
positively electrical body, whether it is charged with passion or power,
with some non-conductor between you and it, not with your naked hands.
--The above were some of the young gentleman's working axioms; and he
proceeded to act in accordance with them.

He began by paying his court more assiduously to his uncle.  It was not
very hard to ingratiate himself in that quarter; for his manners were
insinuating, and his precocious experience of life made him entertaining.
The old neglected billiard--room was soon put in order, and Dick, who was
a magnificent player, had a series of games with his uncle, in which,
singularly enough, he was beaten, though his antagonist had been out of
play for years.  He evinced a profound interest in the family history,
insisted on having the details of its early alliances, and professed a
great pride in it, which he had inherited from his father, who, though he
had allied himself with the daughter of an alien race, had yet chosen one
with the real azure blood in her veins, as proud as if she had Castile
and Aragon for her dower and the Cid for her grand-papa.  He also asked a
great deal of advice, such as inexperienced young persons are in need of,
and listened to it with due reverence.

It is not very strange that uncle Dudley took a kinder view of his nephew
than the Judge, who thought he could read a questionable history in his
face,--or the old Doctor, who knew men's temperaments and organizations
pretty well, and had his prejudices about races, and could tell an old
sword-cut and a ballet-mark in two seconds from a scar got by falling
against the fender, or a mark left by king's evil.  He could not be
expected to share our own prejudices; for he had heard nothing of the
wild youth's adventures, or his scamper over the Pampas at short notice.
So, then, "Richard Venner, Esquire, guest of Dudley Venner, Esquire, at
his elegant mansion," prolonged his visit until his presence became
something like a matter of habit, and the neighbors began to think that
the fine old house would be illuminated before long for a grand marriage.

He had done pretty well with the father: the next thing was to gain over
the nurse.  Old Sophy was as cunning as a red fox or a gray woodchuck.
She had nothing in the world to do but to watch Elsie; she had nothing to
care for but this girl and her father.  She had never liked Dick too
well; for he used to make faces at her and tease her when he was a boy,
and now he was a man there was something about him--she could not tell
what--that made her suspicious of him.  It was no small matter to get her
over to his side.

The jet-black Africans know that gold never looks so well as on the foil
of their dark skins.  Dick found in his trunk a string of gold beads,
such as are manufactured in some of our cities, which he had brought from
the gold region of Chili,--so he said,--for the express purpose of giving
them to old Sophy.  These Africans, too, have a perfect passion for
gay-colored clothing; being condemned by Nature, as it were, to a
perpetual mourning-suit, they love to enliven it with all sorts of
variegated stuffs of sprightly patterns, aflame with red and yellow.  The
considerate young man had remembered this, too, and brought home for
Sophy some handkerchiefs of rainbow hues, which had been strangely
overlooked till now, at the bottom of one of his trunks.  Old Sophy took
his gifts, but kept her black eyes open and watched every movement of the
young people all the more closely. It was through her that the father had
always known most of the actions and tendencies of his daughter.

In the mean time the strange adventure on The Mountain had brought the
young master into new relations with Elsie.  She had led him out of,
danger; perhaps saved him from death by the strange power she exerted.
He was grateful, and yet shuddered at the recollection of the whole
scene.  In his dreams he was pursued by the glare of cold glittering
eyes, whether they were in the head of a woman or of a reptile he could
not always tell, the images had so run together. But he could not help
seeing that the eyes of the young girl had been often, very often, turned
upon him when he had been looking away, and fell as his own glance met
them.  Helen Darley told him very plainly that this girl was thinking
about him more than about her book.  Dick Venner found she was getting
more constant in her attendance at school.  He learned, on inquiry, that
there was a new master, a handsome young man.  The handsome young man
would not have liked the look that, came over Dick's face when he heard
this fact mentioned.

In short, everything was getting tangled up together, and there would be
no chance of disentangling the threads in this chapter.




CHAPTER XV.

PHYSIOLOGICAL.

If Master Bernard felt a natural gratitude to his young pupil for saving
him from an imminent peril, he was in a state of infinite perplexity to
know why he should have needed such aid.  He, an active, muscular,
courageous, adventurous young fellow, with--a stick in his hand, ready to
hold down the Old Serpent himself, if he had come in his way, to stand
still, staring into those two eyes, until they came up close to him, and
the strange, terrible sound seemed to freeze him stiff where he
stood,--what was the meaning of it?  Again, what was the influence this
girl had seemingly exerted, under which the venomous creature had
collapsed in such a sudden way?  Whether he had been awake or dreaming he
did not feel quite sure.  He knew he had gone up The Mountain, at any
rate; he knew he had come down The Mountain with the girl walking just
before him;--there was no forgetting her figure, as she walked on in
silence, her braided locks falling a little, for want of the lost
hairpin, perhaps, and looking like a wreathing coil of--Shame on such
fancies!--to wrong that supreme crowning gift of abounding Nature, a rush
of shining black hair, which, shaken loose, would cloud her all round,
like Godiva, from brow to instep!  He was sure he had sat down before the
fissure or cave.  He was sure that he was led softly away from the place,
and that it was Elsie who had led him.  There was the hair-pin to show
that so far it was not a dream.  But between these recollections came a
strange confusion; and the more the master thought, the more he was
perplexed to know whether she had waked him, sleeping, as he sat on the
stone, from some frightful dream, such as may come in a very brief
slumber, or whether she had bewitched him into a trance with those
strange eyes of hers, or whether it was all true, and he must solve its
problem as he best might.

There was another recollection connected with this mountain adventure.
As they approached the mansion-house, they met a young man, whom Mr.
Bernard remembered having seen once at least before, and whom he had
heard of as a cousin of the young girl.  As Cousin Richard Venner, the
person in question, passed them, he took the measure, so to speak, of Mr.
Bernard, with a look so piercing, so exhausting, so practised, so
profoundly suspicious, that the young master felt in an instant that he
had an enemy in this handsome youth,--an enemy, too, who was like to be
subtle and dangerous.

Mr. Bernard had made up his mind, that, come what might, enemy or no
enemy, live or die, he would solve the mystery of Elsie Venner, sooner or
later.  He was not a man to be frightened out of his resolution by a
scowl, or a stiletto, or any unknown means of mischief, of which a whole
armory was hinted at in that passing look Dick Venner had given him.
Indeed, like most adventurous young persons, he found a kind of charm in
feeling that there might be some dangers in the way of his
investigations.  Some rumors which had reached him about the supposed
suitor of Elsie Venner, who was thought to be a desperate kind of fellow,
and whom some believed to be an unscrupulous adventurer, added a curious,
romantic kind of interest to the course of physiological and
psychological inquiries he was about instituting.

The afternoon on The Mountain was still upper-most in his mind.  Of
course he knew the common stories--about fascination.  He had once been
himself an eyewitness of the charming of a small bird by one of our
common harmless serpents.  Whether a human being could be reached by this
subtile agency, he had been skeptical, notwithstanding the mysterious
relation generally felt to exist between man and this creature, "cursed
above all cattle and above every beast of the field,"--a relation which
some interpret as the fruit of the curse, and others hold to be so
instinctive that this animal has been for that reason adopted as the
natural symbol of evil.  There was another solution, however, supplied
him by his professional reading.  The curious work of Mr. Braid of
Manchester had made him familiar with the phenomena of a state allied to
that produced by animal magnetism, and called by that writer by the name
of hypnotism.  He found, by referring to his note-book, the statement
was, that, by fixing the eyes on a bright object so placed as to produce
a strain upon the eyes and eyelids, and to maintain a steady fixed stare,
there comes on in a few seconds a very singular condition, characterized
by muscular rigidity and inability to move, with a strange exaltation of
most of the senses, and generally a closure of the eyelids,--this
condition being followed by torpor.

Now this statement of Mr. Braid's, well known to the scientific world,
and the truth of which had been confirmed by Mr. Bernard in certain
experiments he had instituted, as it has been by many other
experimenters, went far to explain the strange impressions, of which,
waking or dreaming, he had certainly been the subject.  His nervous
system had been in a high state of exaltation at the time.  He remembered
how the little noises that made rings of sound in the silence of the
woods, like pebbles dropped in still waters, had reached his inner
consciousness.  He remembered that singular sensation in the roots of the
hair, when he came on the traces of the girl's presence, reminding him of
a line in a certain poem which he had read lately with a new and peculiar
interest.  He even recalled a curious evidence of exalted sensibility and
irritability, in the twitching of the minute muscles of the internal ear
at every unexpected sound, producing an odd little snap in the middle of
the head, which proved to him that he was getting very nervous.

The next thing was to find out whether it were possible that the venomous
creature's eyes should have served the purpose of Mr. Braid's "bright
object" held very close to the person experimented on, or whether they
had any special power which could be made the subject of exact
observation.

For this purpose Mr. Bernard considered it necessary to get a live
crotalus or two into his possession, if this were possible.  On inquiry,
he found that there was a certain family living far up the mountainside,
not a mile from the ledge, the members of which were said to have taken
these creatures occasionally, and not to be in any danger, or at least in
any fear, of being injured by them.  He applied to these people, and
offered a reward sufficient to set them at work to capture some of these
animals, if such a thing were possible.

A few days after this, a dark, gypsy-looking woman presented herself at
his door.  She held up her apron as if it contained something precious in
the bag she made with it.

"Y' wanted some rattlers," said the woman.  "Here they be."

She opened her apron and showed a coil of rattlesnakes lying very
peaceably in its fold.  They lifted their heads up, as if they wanted to
see what was going on, but showed no sign of anger.

"Are you crazy?"  said Mr. Bernard.  "You're dead in an hour, if one of
those creatures strikes you!"

He drew back a little, as he spoke; it might be simple disgust; it might
be fear; it might be what we call antipathy, which is different from
either, and which will sometimes show itself in paleness, and even
faintness, produced by objects perfectly harmless and not in themselves
offensive to any sense.

"Lord bless you," said the woman, "rattlers never touches our folks. I'd
jest 'z lieves handle them creaturs as so many striped snakes."

So saying, she put their heads down with her hand, and packed them
together in her apron as if they had been bits of cart-rope.

Mr. Bernard had never heard of the power, or, at least, the belief in the
possession of a power by certain persons, which enables them to handle
these frightful reptiles with perfect impunity.  The fact, however, is
well known to others, and more especially to a very distinguished
Professor in one of the leading institutions of the great city of the
land, whose experiences in the neighborhood of Graylock, as he will
doubtless inform the curious, were very much like those of the young
master.

Mr. Bernard had a wired cage ready for his formidable captives, and
studied their habits and expression with a strange sort of interest. What
did the Creator mean to signify, when he made such shapes of horror, and,
as if he had doubly cursed this envenomed wretch, had set a mark upon him
and sent him forth the Cain of the brotherhood of serpents?  It was a
very curious fact that the first train of thoughts Mr. Bernard's small
menagerie suggested to him was the grave, though somewhat worn, subject
of the origin of evil.  There is now to be seen in a tall glass jar, in
the Museum of Comparative Anatomy at Cantabridge in the territory of the
Massachusetts, a huge crotalus, of a species which grows to more
frightful dimensions than our own, under the hotter skies of South
America.  Look at it, ye who would know what is the tolerance, the
freedom from prejudice, which can suffer such an incarnation of all that
is devilish to lie unharmed in the cradle of Nature!  Learn, too, that
there are many things in this world which we are warned to shun, and are
even suffered to slay, if need be, but which we must not hate, unless we
would hate what God loves and cares for.

Whatever fascination the creature might exercise in his native haunts,
Mr. Bernard found himself not in the least nervous or affected in any way
while looking at his caged reptiles.  When their cage was shaken, they
would lift their heads and spring their rattles; but the sound was by no
means so formidable to listen to as when it reverberated among the chasms
of the echoing rocks.  The expression of the creatures was watchful,
still, grave, passionless, fate-like, suggesting a cold malignity which
seemed to be waiting for its opportunity.  Their awful, deep-cut mouths
were sternly closed over the long hollow fangs which rested their roots
against the swollen poison-gland, where the venom had been hoarding up
ever since the last stroke had emptied it.  They never winked, for
ophidians have no movable eyelids, but kept up that awful fixed stare
which made the two unwinking gladiators the survivors of twenty pairs
matched by one of the Roman Emperors, as Pliny tells us, in his "Natural
History."  Their eyes did not flash, but shone with a cold still light.
They were of a pale-golden or straw color, horrible to look into, with
their stony calmness, their pitiless indifference, hardly enlivened by
the almost imperceptible vertical slit of the pupil, through which Death
seemed to be looking out like the archer behind the long narrow loop-hole
in a blank turret-wall.  On the whole, the caged reptiles, horrid as they
were, hardly matched his recollections of what he had seen or dreamed he
save at the cavern. These looked dangerous enough, but yet quiet.  A
treacherous stillness, however,--as the unfortunate New York physician
found, when he put his foot out to wake up the torpid creature, and
instantly the fang flashed through his boot, carrying the poison into his
blood, and death with it.

Mr. Bernard kept these strange creatures, and watched all their habits
with a natural curiosity.  In any collection of animals the venomous
beasts are looked at with the greatest interest, just as the greatest
villains are most run after by the unknown public.  Nobody troubles
himself for a common striped snake or a petty thief, but a cobra or a
wife-killer is a centre of attraction to all eyes.  These captives did
very little to earn their living, but, on the other hand, their living
was not expensive, their diet being nothing but air, au naturel.  Months
and months these creatures will live and seem to thrive well enough, as
any showman who has then in his menagerie will testify, though they never
touch anything to eat or drink.

In the mean time Mr. Bernard had become very curious about a class of
subjects not treated of in any detail in those text-books accessible in
most country-towns, to the exclusion of the more special treatises, and
especially of the rare and ancient works found on the shelves of the
larger city-libraries.  He was on a visit to old Dr. Kittredge one day,
having been asked by him to call in for a few moments as soon as
convenient.  The Doctor smiled good-humoredly when he asked him if he had
an extensive collection of medical works.

"Why, no," said the old Doctor, "I haven't got a great many printed
books; and what I have I don't read quite as often as I might, I'm
afraid.  I read and studied in the time of it, when I was in the midst of
the young men who were all at work with their books; but it's a mighty
hard matter, when you go off alone into the country, to keep up with all
that's going on in the Societies and the Colleges. I'll tell you, though,
Mr. Langdon, when a man that's once started right lives among sick folks
for five-and-thirty years, as I've done, if he has n't got a library of
five-and-thirty volumes bound up in his head at the end of that time,
he'd better stop driving round and sell his horse and sulky.  I know the
bigger part of the families within a dozen miles' ride.  I know the
families that have a way of living through everything, and I know the
other set that have the trick of dying without any kind of reason for it.
I know the years when the fevers and dysenteries are in earnest, and when
they're only making believe.  I know the folks that think they're dying
as soon as they're sick, and the folks that never find out they 're sick
till they're dead.  I don't want to undervalue your science, Mr. Langdon.
There are things I never learned, because they came in after my day, and
I am very glad to send my patients to those that do know them, when I am
at fault; but I know these people about here, fathers and mothers, and
children and grandchildren, so as all the science in the world can't know
them, without it takes time about it, and sees them grow up and grow old,
and how the wear and tear of life comes to them.  You can't tell a horse
by driving him once, Mr. Langdon, nor a patient by talking half an hour
with him."

"Do you know much about the Veneer family?"  said Mr. Bernard, in a
natural way enough, the Doctor's talk having suggested the question.

The Doctor lifted his head with his accustomed movement, so as to command
the young man through his spectacles.

"I know all the families of this place and its neighborhood," he
answered.

"We have the young lady studying with us at the Institute," said Mr.
Bernard.

"I know it," the Doctor answered.  "Is she a good scholar?"

All this time the Doctor's eyes were fixed steadily on Mr. Bernard,
looking through the glasses.

"She is a good scholar enough, but I don't know what to make of her.
Sometimes I think she is a little out of her head.  Her father, I
believe, is sensible enough;--what sort of a woman was her mother,
Doctor?--I suppose, of course, you remember all about her?"

"Yes, I knew her mother.  She was a very lovely young woman."--The Doctor
put his hand to his forehead and drew a long breath.--"What is there you
notice out of the way about Elsie Venner?"

"A good many things," the master answered.  "She shuns all the other
girls.  She is getting a strange influence over my fellow-teacher, a
young lady,--you know Miss Helen Darley, perhaps?  I am afraid this girl
will kill her.  I never saw or heard of anything like it, in prose at
least;--do you remember much of Coleridge's Poems, Doctor?"

The good old Doctor had to plead a negative.

"Well, no matter.  Elsie would have been burned for a witch in old times.
I have seen the girl look at Miss Darley when she had not the least idea
of it, and all at once I would see her grow pale and moist, and sigh, and
move round uneasily, and turn towards Elsie, and perhaps get up and go to
her, or else have slight spasmodic movements that looked like
hysterics;--do you believe in the evil eye, Doctor?"

"Mr. Langdon," the Doctor said, solemnly, "there are strange things about
Elsie Veneer,--very strange things.  This was what I wanted to speak to
you about.  Let me advise you all to be very patient with the girl, but
also very careful.  Her love is not to be desired, and "--he spoke in a
lower tone--"her hate is to be dreaded.  Do you think she has any special
fancy for anybody else in the school besides Miss Darley?"

Mr. Bernard could not stand the old Doctor's spectacled eyes without
betraying a little of the feeling natural to a young man to whom a home
question involving a possible sentiment is put suddenly.

"I have suspected," he said,--"I have had a kind of feeling--that
she--Well, come, Doctor,--I don't know that there 's any use in
disguising the matter,--I have thought Elsie Veneer had rather a fancy
for somebody else,--I mean myself."

There was something so becoming in the blush with which the young man
made this confession, and so manly, too, in the tone with which he spoke,
so remote from any shallow vanity, such as young men who are incapable of
love are apt to feel, when some loose tendril of a woman's fancy which a
chance wind has blown against them twines about them for the want of
anything better, that the old Doctor looked at him admiringly, and could
not help thinking that it was no wonder any young girl should be pleased
with him.

"You are a man of nerve, Mr. Langdon?" said the Doctor.

"I thought so till very lately," he replied.  "I am not easily
frightened, but I don't know but I might be bewitched or magnetized, or
whatever it is when one is tied up and cannot move.  I think I can find
nerve enough, however, if there is any special use you want to put it
to."

"Let me ask you one more question, Mr. Langdon.  Do you find yourself
disposed to take a special interest in Elsie,--to fall in love with her,
in a word?  Pardon me, for I do not ask from curiosity, but a much more
serious motive."

"Elsie interests me," said the young man, "interests me strangely. She
has a wild flavor in her character which is wholly different from that of
any human creature I ever saw.  She has marks of genius, poetic or
dramatic,--I hardly know which.  She read a passage from Keats's 'Lamia'
the other day, in the schoolroom, in such a way that I declare to you I
thought some of the girls would faint or go into fits.  Miss Darley got
up and left the room, trembling all over. Then, I pity her, she is so
lonely.  The girls are afraid of her, and she seems to have either a
dislike or a fear of them.  They have all sorts of painful stories about
her.  They give her a name which no human creature ought to bear.  They
say she hides a mark on her neck by always wearing a necklace.  She is
very graceful, you know, and they will have it that she can twist herself
into all sorts of shapes, or tie herself in a knot, if she wants to.
There is not one of them that will look her in the eyes.  I pity the poor
girl; but, Doctor, I do not love her.  I would risk my life for her, if
it would do her any good, but it would be in cold blood.  If her hand
touches mine, it is not a thrill of passion I feel running through me,
but a very different emotion.  Oh, Doctor! there must be something in
that creature's blood which has killed the humanity in her.  God only
knows the cause that has blighted such a soul in so beautiful a body! No,
Doctor, I do not love the girl."

"Mr. Langdon," said the Doctor, "you are young, and I am old.  Let me
talk to you with an old man's privilege, as an adviser.  You have come to
this country-town without suspicion, and you are moving in the midst of
perils.  There are things which I must not tell you now; but I may warn
you.  Keep your eyes open and your heart shut.  If, through pitying that
girl, you ever come to love her, you are lost. If you deal carelessly
with her, beware!  This is not all.  There are other eyes on you beside
Elsie Venner's.  Do you go armed?"

"I do!" said Mr. Bernard,--and he "put his hands up" in the shape of
fists, in such a way as to show that he was master of the natural weapons
at any rate.

The Doctor could not help smiling.  But his face fell in an instant.

"You may want something more than those tools to work with.  Come with me
into my sanctum."

The Doctor led Mr. Bernard into a small room opening out of the study.
It was a place such as anybody but a medical man would shiver to enter.
There was the usual tall box with its bleached, rattling tenant; there
were jars in rows where "interesting cases" outlived the grief of widows
and heirs in alcoholic immortality,--for your "preparation-jar" is the
true "monumentum aere perennius;" there were various semi-possibilities
of minute dimensions and unpromising developments; there were shining
instruments of evil aspect, and grim plates on the walls, and on one
shelf by itself, accursed and apart, coiled in a long cylinder of spirit,
a huge crotalus, rough-scaled, flatheaded, variegated with dull bands,
one of which partially encircled the neck like a collar,--an awful wretch
to look upon, with murder written all over him in horrid hieroglyphics.
Mr. Bernard's look was riveted on this creature,--not fascinated
certainly, for its eyes looked like white beads, being clouded by the
action of the spirits in which it had been long kept,--but fixed by some
indefinite sense of the renewal of a previous impression;--everybody
knows the feeling, with its suggestion of some past state of existence.
There was a scrap of paper on the jar, with something written on it.  He
was reaching up to read it when the Doctor touched him lightly.

"Look here, Mr. Langdon!" he said, with a certain vivacity of manner, as
if wishing to call away his attention,--"this is my armory."

The Doctor threw open the door of a small cabinet, where were disposed in
artistic patterns various weapons of offence and defence,--for he was a
virtuoso in his way, and by the side of the implements of the art of
healing had pleased himself with displaying a collection of those other
instruments, the use of which renders the first necessary.

"See which of these weapons you would like best to carry about you," said
the Doctor.

Mr. Bernard laughed, and looked at the Doctor as if he half doubted
whether he was in earnest.

"This looks dangerous enough," he said,--"for the man who carries it, at
least."

He took down one of the prohibited Spanish daggers or knives which a
traveller may, occasionally get hold of and smuggle out of the country.
The blade was broad, trowel-like, but the point drawn out several inches,
so as to look like a skewer.

"This must be a jealous bull-fighter's weapon," he said, and put it back
in its place.

Then he took down an ancient-looking broad-bladed dagger, with a complex
aspect about it, as if it had some kind of mechanism connected with it.

"Take care!" said the Doctor; "there is a trick to that dagger."

He took it and touched a spring.  The dagger split suddenly into three
blades, as when one separates the forefinger and the ring-finger from the
middle one.  The outside blades were sharp on their outer edge.  The stab
was to be made with the dagger shut, then the spring touched and the
split blades withdrawn.

Mr. Bernard replaced it, saying, that it would have served for sidearm to
old Suwarrow, who told his men to work their bayonets back and forward
when they pinned a Turk, but to wriggle them about in the wound when they
stabbed a Frenchman.

"Here," said the Doctor, "this is the thing you want."

He took down a much more modern and familiar implement,--a small,
beautifully finished revolver.

"I want you to carry this," he said; "and more than that, I want you to
practise with it often, as for amusement, but so that it maybe seen and
understood that you are apt to have a pistol about you. Pistol-shooting
is pleasant sport enough, and there is no reason why you should not
practise it like other young fellows.  And now," the Doctor said, "I have
one other, weapon to give you."

He took a small piece of parchment and shook a white powder into it from
one of his medicine-jars.  The jar was marked with the name of a mineral
salt, of a nature to have been serviceable in case of sudden illness in
the time of the Borgias.  The Doctor folded the parchment carefully, and
marked the Latin name of the powder upon it.

"Here," he said, handing it to Mr. Bernard, "you see what it is, and you
know what service it can render.  Keep these two protectors about your
person day and night; they will not harm you, and you may want one or the
other or both before you think of it."

Mr. Bernard thought it was very odd, and not very old-gentlemanlike, to
be fitting him out for treason, stratagem, and spoils, in this way.
There was no harm, however, in carrying a doctor's powder in his pocket,
or in amusing himself with shooting at a mark, as he had often done
before.  If the old gentleman had these fancies, it was as well to humor
him.

So he thanked old Doctor Kittredge, and shook his hand warmly as he left
him.

"The fellow's hand did not tremble, nor his color change," the Doctor
said, as he watched him walking away.  "He is one of the right sort."




CHAPTER XVI

EPISTOLARY.

Mr. Langdon to the Professor.

MY DEAR PROFESSOR, You were kind enough to promise me that you would
assist me in any professional or scientific investigations in which I
might become engaged.  I have of late become deeply interested in a class
of subjects which present peculiar difficulty, and I must exercise the
privilege of questioning you on some points upon which I desire
information I cannot otherwise obtain.  I would not trouble you, if I
could find any person or books competent to enlighten me on some of these
singular matters which have so excited me.  The leading doctor here is a
shrewd, sensible man, but not versed in the curiosities of medical
literature.

I proceed, with your leave, to ask a considerable number of
questions,--hoping to get answers to some of them, at least.

Is there any evidence that human beings can be infected or wrought upon
by poisons, or otherwise, so that they shall manifest any of the
peculiarities belonging to beings of a lower nature?  Can such
peculiarities--be transmitted by inheritance?  Is there anything to
countenance the stories, long and widely current, about the "evil eye"?
or is it a mere fancy that such a power belongs to any human being?  Have
you any personal experience as to the power of fascination said to be
exercised by certain animals?  What can you make of those circumstantial
statements we have seen in the papers, of children forming mysterious
friendships with ophidians of different species, sharing their food with
them, and seeming to be under some subtile influence exercised by those
creatures?  Have you read, critically, Coleridge's poem of "Christabel,"
and Keats's "Lamia"?--If so, can you understand them, or find any
physiological foundation for the story of either?

There is another set of questions of a different nature I should like to
ask, but it is hardly fair to put so many on a single sheet. There is
one, however, you must answer.  Do you think there may be
predispositions, inherited or ingrafted, but at any rate constitutional,
which shall take out certain apparently voluntary determinations from the
control of the will, and leave them as free from moral responsibility as
the instincts of the lower animals?  Do you not think there may be a
crime which is not a sin?

Pardon me, my dear Sir, for troubling you with such a list of notes of
interrogation.  There are some very strange things going on here in this
place, country-town as it is.  Country-life is apt to be dull; but when
it once gets going, it beats the city hollow, because it gives its whole
mind to what it is about.  These rural sinners make terrible work with
the middle of the Decalogue, when they get started.  However, I hope I
shall live through my year's school-keeping without catastrophes, though
there are queer doings about me which puzzle me and might scare some
people.  If anything should happen, you will be one of the first to hear
of it, no doubt.  But I trust not to help out the editors of the
"Rockland Weekly Universe" with an obituary of the late lamented, who
signed himself in life--

Your friend and pupil,
BERNARD C.  LANGDON.


The Professor to Mr. Langdon.

MY DEAR MR. LANGDON, I do not wonder that you find no answer from your
country friends to the curious questions you put.  They belong to that
middle region between science and poetry which sensible men, as they are
called, are very shy of meddling with.  Some people think that truth and
gold are always to be washed for; but the wiser sort are of opinion,
that, unless there are so many grains to the peck of sand or nonsense
respectively, it does not pay to wash for either, so long as one can find
anything else to do.  I don't doubt there is some truth in the phenomena
of animal magnetism, for instance; but when you ask me to cradle for it,
I tell you that the hysteric girls cheat so, and the professionals are
such a set of pickpockets, that I can do something better than hunt for
the grains of truth among their tricks and lies. Do you remember what I
used to say in my lectures?--or were you asleep just then, or cutting
your initials on the rail?  (You see I can ask questions, my young
friend.) Leverage is everything,--was what I used to say;--don't begin to
pry till you have got the long arm on your side.

To please you, and satisfy your doubts as far as possible, I have looked
into the old books,--into Schenckius and Turner and Kenelm. Digby and the
rest, where I have found plenty of curious stories which you must take
for what they are worth.

Your first question I can answer in the affirmative upon pretty good
authority.  Mizaldus tells, in his "Memorabilia," the well-known story of
the girl fed on poisons, who was sent by the king of the Indies to
Alexander the Great.  "When Aristotle saw her eyes sparkling and snapping
like those of serpents, he said, 'Look out for yourself, Alexander! this
is a dangerous companion for you!'"--and sure enough, the young lady
proved to be a very unsafe person to her friends.  Cardanus gets a story
from Avicenna, of a certain man bit by a serpent, who recovered of his
bite, the snake dying therefrom. This man afterwards had a daughter whom
venomous serpents could not harm, though she had a fatal power over them.

I suppose you may remember the statements of old authors about
Zycanthropy, the disease in which men took on the nature and aspect of
wolves.  Actius and Paulus, both men of authority, describe it. Altomaris
gives a horrid case; and Fincelius mentions one occurring as late as
1541, the subject of which was captured, still insisting that he was a
wolf, only that the hair of his hide was turned in! Versipelles, it may
be remembered, was the Latin name for these "were-wolves."

As for the cases where rabid persons have barked and bit like dogs, there
are plenty of such on record.

More singular, or at least more rare, is the account given by Andreas
Baccius, of a man who was struck in the hand by a cock, with his beak,
and who died on the third day thereafter, looking for all the world like
a fighting-cock, to the great horror of the spectators.

As to impressions transmitted at a very early period of existence, every
one knows the story of King James's fear of a naked sword, and the way it
is accounted for.  Sir Kenelm Digby says,--"I remember when he dubbed me
Knight, in the ceremony of putting the point of a naked sword upon my
shoulder, he could not endure to look upon it, but turned his face
another way, insomuch, that, in lieu of touching my shoulder, he had
almost thrust the point into my eyes, had not the Duke of Buckingham
guided his hand aright."  It is he, too, who tells the story of the
mulberry mark upon the neck of a certain lady of high condition, which
"every year, to mulberry season, did swell, grow big, and itch."  And
Gaffarel mentions the case of a girl born with the figure of a fish on
one of her limbs, of which the wonder was, that, when the girl did eat
fish, this mark put her to sensible pain.  But there is no end to cases
of this kind, and I could give some of recent date, if necessary, lending
a certain plausibility at least to the doctrine of transmitted
impressions.

I never saw a distinct case of evil eye, though I have seen eyes so bad
that they might produce strange effects on very sensitive natures.  But
the belief in it under various names, fascination, jettcztura, etc., is
so permanent and universal, from Egypt to Italy, and from the days of
Solomon to those of Ferdinand of Naples, that there must be some
peculiarity, to say the least, on which the opinion is based.  There is
very strong evidence that some such power is exercised by certain of the
lower animals.  Thus, it is stated on good authority that "almost every
animal becomes panic-struck at the sight of the rattlesnake, and seems at
once deprived of the power of motion, or the exercise of its usual
instinct of self-preservation." Other serpents seem to share this power
of fascination, as the Cobra and the Buccephalus Capensis.

Some think that it is nothing but fright; others attribute it to the

               "strange powers that lie
          Within the magic circle of the eye,"--

as Churchill said, speaking of Garrick.

You ask me about those mysterious and frightful intimacies between
children and serpents, of which so many instances have been recorded. I
am sure I cannot tell what to make of them.  I have seen several such
accounts in recent papers, but here is one published in the seventeenth
century, which is as striking as any of the more modern ones:

"Mr. Herbert Tones of Monmouth, when he was a little Boy, was used to eat
his Milk in a Garden in the Morning, and was no sooner there, but a large
Snake always came, and eat out of the Dish with him, and did so for a
considerable time, till one Morning, he striking the Snake on the Head,
it hissed at him.  Upon which he told his Mother that the Baby (for so he
call'd it) cry'd Hiss at him.  His Mother had it kill'd, which occasioned
him a great Fit of Sickness, and 'twas thought would have dy'd, but did
recover."

There was likewise one "William Writtle, condemned at Maidston Assizes
for a double murder, told a Minister that was with him after he was
condemned, that his mother told him, that when he was a Child, there
crept always to him a Snake, wherever she laid him.  Sometimes she would
convey him up Stairs, and leave him never so little, she should be sure
to find a Snake in the Cradle with him, but never perceived it did him
any harm."

One of the most striking alleged facts connected with the mysterious
relation existing between the serpent and-the human species is the
influence which the poison of the Crotulus, taken internally, seemed to
produce over the moral faculties, in the experiments instituted by Dr.
Hering at Surinam.  There is something frightful in the disposition of
certain ophidians, as the whipsnake, which darts at the eyes of cattle
without any apparent provocation or other motive. It is natural enough
that the evil principle should have been represented in the form of a
serpent, but it is strange to think of introducing it into a human being
like cow-pox by vaccination.

You know all about the Psylli, or ancient serpent tamers, I suppose.
Savary gives an account of the modern serpent-tamers in his "Letters on
Egypt."  These modern jugglers are in the habit of making the venomous
Naja counterfeit death, lying out straight and stiff, changing it into a
rod, as the ancient magicians did with their serpents, (probably the same
animal,) in the time of Moses.

I am afraid I cannot throw much light on "Christabel" or "Lamia" by any
criticism I can offer.  Geraldine, in the former, seems to be simply a
malignant witch-woman with the evil eye, but with no absolute ophidian
relationship.  Lamia is a serpent transformed by magic into a woman.  The
idea of both is mythological, and not in any sense physiological.  Some
women unquestionably suggest the image of serpents; men rarely or never.
I have been struck, like many others, with the ophidian head and eye of
the famous Rachel.

Your question about inherited predispositions, as limiting the sphere of
the will, and, consequently, of moral accountability, opens a very wide
range of speculation.  I can give you only a brief abstract of my own
opinions on this delicate and difficult subject.  Crime and sin, being
the preserves of two great organized interests, have been guarded against
all reforming poachers with as great jealousy as the Royal Forests.  It
is so easy to hang a troublesome fellow!  It is so much simpler to
consign a soul to perdition, or say masses, for money, to save it, than
to take the blame on ourselves for letting it grow up in neglect and run
to ruin for want of humanizing influences! They hung poor, crazy
Bellingham for shooting Mr. Perceval.  The ordinary of Newgate preached
to women who were to swing at Tyburn for a petty theft as if they were
worse than other people,--just as though he would not have been a
pickpocket or shoplifter, himself, if he had been born in a den of
thieves and bred up to steal or starve! The English law never began to
get hold of the idea that a crime was not necessarily a sin, till
Hadfield, who thought he was the Saviour of mankind, was tried for
shooting at George the Third;--lucky for him that he did not hit his
Majesty!

It is very singular that we recognize all the bodily defects that unfit a
man for military service, and all the intellectual ones that limit his
range of thought, but always talk at him as if all his moral powers were
perfect.  I suppose we must punish evil-doers as we extirpate vermin; but
I don't know that we have any more right to judge them than we have to
judge rats and mice, which are just as good as cats and weasels, though
we think it necessary to treat them as criminals.

The limitations of human responsibility have never been properly studied,
unless it be by the phrenologists. You know from my lectures that I
consider phrenology, as taught, a pseudo-science, and not a branch of
positive knowledge; but, for all that, we owe it an immense debt.  It has
melted the world's conscience in its crucible, and cast it in a new
mould, with features less like those of Moloch and more like those of
humanity.  If it has failed to demonstrate its system of special
correspondences, it has proved that there are fixed relations between
organization and mind and character.  It has brought out that great
doctrine of moral insanity, which has done more to make men charitable
and soften legal and theological barbarism than any one doctrine that I
can think of since the message of peace and good-will to men.

Automatic action in the moral world; the reflex movement which seems to
be self-determination, and has been hanged and howled at as such
(metaphorically) for nobody knows how many centuries: until somebody
shall study this as Marshall Hall has studied reflex nervous action in
the bodily system, I would not give much for men's judgments of each
others' characters.  Shut up the robber and the defaulter, we must.  But
what if your oldest boy had been stolen from his cradle and bred in a
North-Street cellar?  What if you are drinking a little too much wine and
smoking a little too much tobacco, and your son takes after you, and so
your poor grandson's brain being a little injured in physical texture, he
loses the fine moral sense on which you pride yourself, and doesn't see
the difference between signing another man's name to a draft and his own?

I suppose the study of automatic action in the moral world (you see what
I mean through the apparent contradiction of terms) may be a dangerous
one in the view of many people.  It is liable to abuse, no doubt.  People
are always glad to, get hold of anything which limits their
responsibility.  But remember that our moral estimates come down to us
from ancestors who hanged children for stealing forty shillings' worth,
and sent their souls to perdition for the sin of being born,--who
punished the unfortunate families of suicides, and in their eagerness for
justice executed one innocent person every three years, on the average,
as Sir James Mackintosh tells us.

I do not know in what shape the practical question may present itself to
you; but I will tell you my rule in life, and I think you will find it a
good one.  Treat bad men exactly as if they were insane. They are
in-sane, out of health, morally.  Reason, which is food to sound minds,
is not tolerated, still less assimilated, unless administered with the
greatest caution; perhaps, not at all.  Avoid collision with them, so far
as you honorably can; keep your temper, if you can,--for one angry man is
as good as another; restrain them from violence, promptly, completely,
and with the least possible injury, just as in the case of maniacs,--and
when you have got rid of them, or got them tied hand and foot so that
they can do no mischief, sit down and contemplate them charitably,
remembering that nine tenths of their' perversity comes from outside
influences, drunken ancestors, abuse in childhood, bad company, from
which you have happily been preserved, and for some of which you, as a
member of society, may be fractionally responsible.  I think also that
there are special influences which work in the brood lake ferments, and I
have a suspicion that some of those curious old stories I cited may have
more recent parallels.  Have you ever met with any cases which admitted
of a solution like that which I have mentioned?

Yours very truly,
_____________   _____________

               Bernard Langdon to Philip Staples.
MY DEAR PHILIP,--

I have been for some months established in this place, turning the main
crank of the machinery for the manufactory of accomplishments
superintended by, or rather worked to the profit of, a certain Mr. Silas
Peckham.  He is a poor wretch, with a little thin fishy blood in his
body, lean and flat, long-armed and large-handed, thick-jointed and
thin-muscled,--you know those unwholesome, weak-eyed, half-fed creatures,
that look not fit to be round among live folks, and yet not quite dead
enough to bury.  If you ever hear of my being in court to answer to a
charge of assault and battery, you may guess that I have been giving him
a thrashing to settle off old scores; for he is a tyrant, and has come
pretty near killing his principal lady-assistant with overworking her and
keeping her out of all decent privileges.

Helen Darley is this lady's name,--twenty two or three years old, I
should think,--a very sweet, pale woman,--daughter of the usual
country-clergyman,--thrown on her own resources from an early age, and
the rest: a common story, but an uncommon person,--very.  All conscience
and sensibility, I should say,--a cruel worker,--no kind of regard for
herself, seems as fragile and supple as a young willow-shoot, but try her
and you find she has the spring in her of a steel cross-bow.  I am glad I
happened to come to this place, if it were only for her sake.  I have
saved that girl's life; I am as sure of it as if I had pulled her out of
the fire or water.

Of course I'm in love with her, you say,--we always love those whom we
have benefited; "saved her life,--her love was the reward of his
devotion," etc., etc., as in a regular set novel.  In love, Philip? Well,
about that,--I love Helen Darley--very much: there is hardly anybody I
love so well.  What a noble creature she is!  One of those that just go
right on, do their own work and everybody else's, killing themselves inch
by inch without ever thinking about it,--singing and dancing at their
toil when they begin, worn and saddened after a while, but pressing
steadily on, tottering by and by, and catching at the rail by the
way-side to help them lift one foot before the other, and at last
falling, face down, arms stretched forward.

Philip, my boy, do you know I am the sort of man that locks his door
sometimes and cries his heart out of his eyes,--that can sob like a woman
and not be ashamed of it?  I come of fighting-blood on one side, you
know; I think I could be savage on occasion.  But I am tender,--more and
more tender as I come into my fulness of manhood. I don't like to strike
a man, (laugh, if you like,--I know I hit hard when I do strike,)--but
what I can't stand is the sight of these poor, patient, toiling women,
who never find out in this life how good they are, and never know what it
is to be told they are angels while they still wear the pleasing
incumbrances of humanity.  I don't know what to make of these cases.  To
think that a woman is never to be a woman again, whatever she may come to
as an unsexed angel,--and that she should die unloved!  Why does not
somebody come and carry off this noble woman, waiting here all ready to
make a man happy? Philip, do you know the pathos there is in the eyes of
unsought women, oppressed with the burden of an inner life unshared?  I
can see into them now as I could not in those 'earlier days.  I sometimes
think their pupils dilate on purpose to let my consciousness glide
through them; indeed, I dread them, I come so close to the nerve of the
soul itself in these momentary intimacies.  You used to tell me I was a
Turk,--that my heart was full of pigeon-holes, with accommodations inside
for a whole flock of doves.  I don't know but I am still as Youngish as
ever in my ways,--Brigham-Youngish, I mean; at any rate, T. always want
to give a little love to all the poor things that cannot have a whole man
to themselves.  If they would only be contented with a little!

Here now are two girls in this school where I am teaching.  One of them,
Rosa M., is not more than sixteen years old, I think they say; but Nature
has forced her into a tropical luxuriance of beauty, as if it were July
with her, instead of May.  I suppose it is all natural enough that this
girl should like a young man's attention, even if he were a grave
schoolmaster; but the eloquence of this young thing's look is
unmistakable,--and yet she does not know the language it is
talking,--they none of them do; and there is where a good many poor
creatures of our good-for-nothing sex are mistaken.  There is no danger
of my being rash, but I think this girl will cost somebody his life yet.
She is one of those women men make a quarrel about and fight to the death
for,--the old feral instinct, you know.

Pray, don't think I am lost in conceit, but there is another girl here
who I begin to think looks with a certain kindness on me.  Her name is
Elsie V., and she is the only daughter and heiress of an old family in
this place.  She is a portentous and almost fearful creature.  If I
should tell you all I know and half of what I fancy about her, you would
tell me to get my life insured at once.  Yet she is the most painfully
interesting being,--so handsome! so lonely!--for she has no friends
among the girls, and sits apart from them,--with black hair like the
flow of a mountain-brook after a thaw, with a low-browed, scowling beauty
of face, and such eyes as were never seen before, I really believe, in
any human creature.

Philip, I don't know what to say about this Elsie.  There is something
about her I have not fathomed.  I have conjectures which I could not
utter to any living soul.  I dare not even hint the possibilities which
have suggested themselves to me.  This I will say, that I do take the
most intense interest in this young person, an interest much more like
pity than love in its common sense.  If what I guess at is true, of all
the tragedies of existence I ever knew this is the saddest, and yet so
full of meaning!  Do not ask me any questions,--I have said more than I
meant to already; but I am involved in strange doubts and
perplexities,--in dangers too, very possibly,--and it is a relief just to
speak ever so guardedly of them to an early and faithful friend.

Yours ever, BERNARD.

P. S.  I remember you had a copy of Fortunius Licetus' "De Monstris"
among your old books.  Can't you lend it to me for a while?  I am
curious, and it will amuse me.




CHAPTER XVII.

OLD SOPHY CALLS ON THE REVEREND DOCTOR.

The two meeting-houses which faced each other like a pair of
fighting-cocks had not flapped their wings or crowed at each other for a
considerable time.  The Reverend Mr. Fairweather had been dyspeptic and
low-spirited of late, and was too languid for controversy.  The Reverend
Doctor Honeywood had been very busy with his benevolent associations, and
had discoursed chiefly on practical matters, to the neglect of special
doctrinal subjects.  His senior deacon ventured to say to him that some
of his people required to be reminded of the great fundamental doctrine
of the worthlessness of all human efforts and motives.  Some of them were
altogether too much pleased with the success of the Temperance Society
and the Association for the Relief of the Poor.  There was a pestilent
heresy about, concerning the satisfaction to be derived from a good
conscience, as if, anybody ever did anything which was not to be hated,
loathed, despised, and condemned.

The old minister listened gravely, with an inward smile, and told his
deacon that he would attend to his suggestion.  After the deacon had
gone, he tumbled over his manuscripts, until at length he came upon his
first-rate old sermon on "Human Nature."  He had read a great deal of
hard theology, and had at last reached that curious state which is so
common in good ministers,--that, namely, in which they contrive to switch
off their logical faculties on the narrow sidetrack of their technical
dogmas, while the great freight-train of their substantial human
qualities keeps in the main highway of common-sense, in which kindly
souls are always found by all who approach them by their human side.

The Doctor read his sermon with a pleasant, paternal interest: it was
well argued from his premises.  Here and there he dashed his pen through
a harsh expression.  Now and then he added an explanation or qualified
abroad statement.  But his mind was on the logical side-track, and he
followed the chain of reasoning without fairly perceiving where it would
lead him, if he carried it into real life.

He was just touching up the final proposition, when his granddaughter,
Letty, once before referred to, came into the room with her smiling face
and lively movement.  Miss Letty or Letitia Forrester was a city-bred
girl of some fifteen or sixteen years old, who was passing the summer
with her grandfather for the sake of country air and quiet.  It was a
sensible arrangement; for, having the promise of figuring as a belle by
and by, and being a little given to dancing, and having a voice which
drew a pretty dense circle around the piano when she sat down to play and
sing, it was hard to keep her from being carried into society before her
time, by the mere force of mutual attraction.  Fortunately, she had some
quiet as well as some social tastes, and was willing enough to pass two
or three of the summer months in the country, where she was much better
bestowed than she would have been at one of those watering-places where
so many half-formed girls get prematurely hardened in the vice of
self-consciousness.

Miss Letty was altogether too wholesome, hearty, and high-strung a young
girl to be a model, according to the flat-chested and cachectic pattern
which is the classical type of certain excellent young females, often the
subjects of biographical memoirs.  But the old minister was proud of his
granddaughter for all that.  She was so full of life, so graceful, so
generous, so vivacious, so ready always to do all she could for him and
for everybody, so perfectly frank in her avowed delight in the pleasures
which this miserable world offered her in the shape of natural beauty, of
poetry, of music, of companionship, of books, of cheerful cooperation in
the tasks of those about her, that the Reverend Doctor could not find it
in his heart to condemn her because she was deficient in those particular
graces and that signal other-worldliness he had sometimes noticed in
feeble young persons suffering from various chronic diseases which
impaired their vivacity and removed them from the range of temptation.

When Letty, therefore, came bounding into the old minister's study, he
glanced up from his manuscript, and, as his eye fell upon her, it flashed
across him that there was nothing so very monstrous and unnatural about
the specimen of congenital perversion he was looking at, with his
features opening into their pleasantest sunshine. Technically, according
to the fifth proposition of the sermon on Human Nature, very bad, no
doubt.  Practically, according to the fact before him, a very pretty
piece of the Creator's handiwork, body and soul.  Was it not a
conceivable thing that the divine grace might show itself in different
forms in a fresh young girl like Letitia, and in that poor thing he had
visited yesterday, half-grown, half-colored, in bed for the last year
with hip-disease?

Was it to be supposed that this healthy young girl, with life throbbing
all over her, could, without a miracle, be good according to the invalid
pattern and formula?

And yet there were mysteries in human nature which pointed to some
tremendous perversion of its tendencies,--to some profound, radical vice
of moral constitution, native or transmitted, as you will have it, but
positive, at any rate, as the leprosy, breaking out in the blood of
races, guard them ever so carefully.  Did he not know the case of a young
lady in Rockland, daughter of one of the first families in the place, a
very beautiful and noble creature to look at, for whose bringing up
nothing had been spared,--a girl who had had governesses to teach her at
the house, who had been indulged almost too kindly,--a girl whose father
had given himself, up to her, he being himself a pure and high-souled
man?--and yet this girl was accused in whispers of having been on the
very verge of committing a fatal crime; she was an object of fear to all
who knew the dark hints which had been let fall about her, and there were
some that believed--Why, what was this but an instance of the total
obliquity and degeneration of the moral principle? and to what could it
be owing, but to an innate organic tendency?

"Busy, grandpapa?" said Letty, and without waiting for an answer kissed
his cheek with a pair of lips made on purpose for that little
function,--fine, but richly turned out, the corners tucked in with a
finish of pretty dimples, the rose-bud lips of girlhood's June.

The old gentleman looked at his granddaughter.  Nature swelled up from
his heart in a wave that sent a glow to his cheek and a sparkle to his
eye.  But it is very hard to be interrupted just as we are winding up a
string of propositions with the grand conclusion which is the statement
in brief of all that has gone before: our own starting-point, into which
we have been trying to back our reader or listener as one backs a, horse
into the shafts.

"Video meliora, proboque,--I see the better, and approve it; deteriora
sequor, I follow after the worse; 't is that natural dislike to what is
good, pure, holy, and true, that inrooted selfishness, totally insensible
to the claims of"--

Here the worthy man was interrupted by Miss Letty.

"Do come, if you can, grandpapa," said the young girl; "here is a poor
old black woman wants to see you so much!"

The good minister was as kind-hearted as if he had never groped in the
dust and ashes of those cruel old abstractions which have killed out so
much of the world's life and happiness.  "With the heart man believeth
unto righteousness;" a man's love is the measure of his fitness for good
or bad company here or elsewhere.  Men are tattooed with their special
beliefs like so many South-Sea Islanders; but a real human heart, with
Divine love in it, beats with the same glow under all, the patterns of
all earth's thousand tribes!

The Doctor sighed, and folded the sermon, and laid the Quarto Cruden on
it.  He rose from his desk, and, looking once more at the young girl's
face, forgot his logical conclusions, and said to himself that she was a
little angel,--which was in violent contradiction to the leading doctrine
of his sermon on Human Nature.  And so he followed her out of the study
into the wide entry of the old-fashioned country-house.

An old black woman sat on the plain oaken settle which humble visitors
waiting to see the minister were wont to occupy.  She was old, but how
old it would be very hard to guess.  She might be seventy.  She might be
ninety.  One could not swear she was not a hundred.  Black women remain
at a stationary age (to the eyes of white people, at least) for thirty
years.  They do not appear to change during this period any more than so
many Trenton trilobites. Bent up, wrinkled, yellow-eyed, with long
upper-lip, projecting jaws, retreating chin, still meek features, long
arms, large flat hands with uncolored palms and slightly webbed fingers,
it was impossible not to see in this old creature a hint of the
gradations by which life climbs up through the lower natures to the
highest human developments.  We cannot tell such old women's ages because
we do not understand the physiognomy of a race so unlike our own.  No
doubt they see a great deal in each other's faces that we
cannot,--changes of color and expression as real as our own, blushes and
sudden betrayals of feeling,--just as these two canaries know what their
single notes and short sentences and full song with this or that
variation mean, though it is a mystery to us unplumed mortals.

This particular old black woman was a striking specimen of her class. Old
as she looked, her eye was bright and knowing.  She wore a red-and-yellow
turban, which set off her complexion well, and hoops of gold in her ears,
and beads of gold about her neck, and an old funeral ring upon her
finger.  She had that touching stillness about her which belongs to
animals that wait to be spoken to and then look up with a kind of sad
humility.

"Why, Sophy!"  said the good minister, "is this you?"

She looked up with the still expression on her face.  "It's ol' Sophy,"
she said.

"Why," said the Doctor, "I did not believe you could walk so far as this
to save the Union.  Bring Sophy a glass of wine, Letty.  Wine's good for
old folks like Sophy and me, after walking a good way, or preaching a
good while."

The young girl stepped into the back-parlor, where she found the great
pewter flagon in which the wine that was left after each
communion-service was brought to the minister's house.  With much toil
she managed to tip it so as to get a couple of glasses filled. The
minister tasted his, and made old Sophy finish hers.

"I wan' to see you 'n' talk wi' you all alone," she said presently.

The minister got up and led the way towards his study.  "To be sure," he
said; he had only waited for her to rest a moment before he asked her
into the library.  The young girl took her gently by the arm, and helped
her feeble steps along the passage.  When they reached the study, she
smoothed the cushion of a rocking-chair, and made the old woman sit down
in it.  Then she tripped lightly away, and left her alone with the
minister.

Old Sophy was a member of the Reverend Doctor Honeywood's church. She had
been put through the necessary confessions in a tolerably satisfactory
manner.  To be sure, as her grandfather had been a cannibal chief,
according to the common story, and, at any rate, a terrible wild savage,
and as her mother retained to the last some of the prejudices of her
early education, there was a heathen flavor in her Christianity which had
often scandalized the elder of the minister's two deacons.  But, the good
minister had smoothed matters over: had explained that allowances were to
be made for those who had been long sitting without the gate of
Zion,--that, no doubt, a part of the curse which descended to the
children of Ham consisted in "having the understanding darkened," as well
as the skin,--and so had brought his suspicious senior deacon to tolerate
old Sophy as one of the communion of fellow-sinners.

--Poor things!  How little we know the simple notions with which these
rudiments of souls are nourished by the Divine Goodness!  Did not Mrs.
Professor come home this very blessed morning with a story of one of her
old black women?

"And how do you feel to-day, Mrs. Robinson?"

"Oh, my dear, I have this singing in my head all the time."  (What
doctors call tinnitus aurium.)

"She 's got a cold in the head," said old Mrs. Rider.

"Oh, no, my dear!  Whatever I'm thinking about, it's all this singing,
this music.  When I'm thinking of the dear Redeemer, it all turns into
this singing and music.  When the clark came to see me, I asked him if he
couldn't cure me, and he said, No,--it was the Holy Spirit in me, singing
to me; and all the time I hear this beautiful music, and it's the Holy
Spirit a-singing to me."

The good man waited for Sophy to speak; but she did not open her lips as
yet.

"I hope you are not troubled in mind or body," he said to her at length,
finding she did not speak.

The poor old woman took out a white handkerchief, and lifted it--to her
black face.  She could not say a word for her tears and sobs.

The minister would have consoled her; he was used to tears, and could in
most cases withstand their contagion manfully; but something choked his
voice suddenly, and when he called upon it, he got no answer, but a
tremulous movement of the muscles, which was worse than silence.

At last she spoke.

"Oh, no, no, no!  It's my poor girl, my darling, my beauty, my baby, that
's grown up to be a woman; she will come to a bad end; she will do
something that will make them kill her or shut her up all her life.  Or,
Doctor, Doctor, save her, pray for her!  It a'n't her fault.  It a'n't
her fault.  If they knew all that I know, they would n' blame that poor
child.  I must tell you, Doctor: if I should die, perhaps nobody else
would tell you.  Massa Veneer can't talk about it.  Doctor Kittredge
won't talk about it.  Nobody but old Sophy to tell you, Doctor; and old
Sophy can't die without telling you."

The kind minister soothed the poor old soul with those gentle, quieting
tones which had carried peace and comfort to so many chambers of sickness
and sorrow, to so many hearts overburdened by the trials laid upon them.

Old Sophy became quiet in a few minutes, and proceeded to tell her story.
She told it in the low half-whisper which is the natural voice of lips
oppressed wish grief and fears; with quick glances around the apartment
from time to time, as if she dreaded lest the dim portraits on the walls
and the dark folios on the shelves might overhear her words.

It was not one of those conversations which a third person can report
minutely, unless by that miracle of clairvoyance known to the readers of
stories made out of authors' brains.  Yet its main character can be
imparted in a much briefer space than the old black woman took to give
all its details.

She went far back to the time when Dudley Venner was born,--she being
then a middle-aged woman.  The heir and hope of a family which had been
narrowing down as if doomed to extinction, he had been surrounded with
every care and trained by the best education he could have in New
England.  He had left college, and was studying the profession which
gentlemen of leisure most affect, when he fell in love with a young girl
left in the world almost alone, as he was. The old woman told the story
of his young love and his joyous bridal with a tenderness which had
something more, even, than her family sympathies to account for it.  Had
she not hanging over her bed a paper-cutting of a profile,--jet black,
but not blacker than the face it represented--of one who would have been
her own husband in the small years of this century, if the vessel in
which he went to sea, like Jamie in the ballad, had not sailed away and
never come back to land?  Had she not her bits of furniture stowed away
which had been got ready for her own wedding,--two rocking-chairs, one
worn with long use, one kept for him so long that it had grown a
superstition with her never to sit in it,--and might he not come back
yet, after all?  Had she not her chest of linen ready for her humble
house-keeping with store of serviceable huckaback and piles of neatly
folded kerchiefs, wherefrom this one that showed so white against her
black face was taken, for that she knew her eyes would betray her in "the
presence"?

All the first part of the story the old woman told tenderly, and yet
dwelling upon every incident with a loving pleasure.  How happy this
young couple had been, what plans and projects of improvement they had
formed, how they lived in each other, always together, so young and fresh
and beautiful as she remembered them in that one early summer when they
walked arm in arm through the wilderness of roses that ran riot in the
garden,--she told of this as loath to leave it and come to the woe that
lay beneath.

She told the whole story;-shall I repeat it?  Not now.  If, in the course
of relating the incidents I have undertaken to report, it tells itself,
perhaps this will be better than to run the risk of producing a painful
impression on some of those susceptible readers whom it would be
ill-advised to disturb or excite, when they rather require to be amused
and soothed.  In our pictures of life, we must show the flowering-out of
terrible growths which have their roots deep, deep underground.  Just how
far we shall lay bare the unseemly roots themselves is a matter of
discretion and taste, and which none of us are infallible.

The old woman told the whole story of Elsie, of her birth, of her
peculiarities of person and disposition, of the passionate fears and
hopes with which her father had watched the course of her development.
She recounted all her strange ways, from the hour when she first tried to
crawl across the carpet, and her father's look as she worked her way
towards him.  With the memory of Juliet's nurse she told the story of her
teething, and how, the woman to whose breast she had clung dying suddenly
about that time, they had to struggle hard with the child before she
would learn the accomplishment of feeding with a spoon.  And so of her
fierce plays and fiercer disputes with that boy who had been her
companion, and the whole scene of the quarrel when she struck him with
those sharp white teeth, frightening her, old Sophy, almost to death;
for, as she said, the boy would have died, if it hadn't been for the old
Doctor's galloping over as fast as he could gallop and burning the places
right out of his arm.  Then came the story of that other incident,
sufficiently alluded to already, which had produced such an ecstasy of
fright and left such a nightmare of apprehension in the household. And so
the old woman came down to this present time.  That boy she never loved
nor trusted was grown to a dark, dangerous-looking man, and he was under
their roof.  He wanted to marry our poor Elsie, and Elsie hated him, and
sometimes she would look at him over her shoulder just as she used to
look at that woman she hated; and she, old Sophy, couldn't sleep for
thinking she should hear a scream from the white chamber some night and
find him in spasms such as that woman came so near dying with.  And then
there was something about Elsie she did not know what to make of: she
would sit and hang her head sometimes, and look as if she were dreaming;
and she brought home books they said a young gentleman up at the great
school lent her; and once she heard her whisper in her sleep, and she
talked as young girls do to themselves when they're thinking about
somebody they have a liking for and think nobody knows it.

She finished her long story at last.  The minister had listened to it in
perfect silence.  He sat still even when she had done speaking,--still,
and lost in thought.  It was a very awkward matter for him to have a hand
in.  Old Sophy was his parishioner, but the Veneers had a pew in the
Reverend Mr. Fairweather's meeting-house.  It would seem that he, Mr.
Fairweather, was the natural adviser of the parties most interested.  Had
he sense and spirit enough to deal with such people? Was there enough
capital of humanity in his somewhat limited nature to furnish sympathy
and unshrinking service for his friends in an emergency? or was he too
busy with his own attacks of spiritual neuralgia, and too much occupied
with taking account of stock of his own thin-blooded offences, to forget
himself and his personal interests on the small scale and the large, and
run a risk of his life, if need were, at any rate give himself up without
reserve to the dangerous task of guiding and counselling these distressed
and imperilled fellow-creatures?

The good minister thought the best thing to do would be to call and talk
over some of these matters with Brother Fairweather,--for so he would
call him at times, especially if his senior deacon were not within
earshot.  Having settled this point, he comforted Sophy with a few words
of counsel and a promise of coming to see her very soon. He then called
his man to put the old white horse into the chaise and drive Sophy back
to the mansion-house.

When the Doctor sat down to his sermon again, it looked very differently
from the way it had looked at the moment he left it. When he came to
think of it, he did not feel quite so sure practically about that matter
of the utter natural selfishness of everybody.  There was Letty, now,
seemed to take a very unselfish interest in that old black woman, and
indeed in poor people generally; perhaps it would not be too much to say
that she was always thinking of other people.  He thought he had seen
other young persons naturally unselfish, thoughtful for others; it seemed
to be a family trait in some he had known.

But most of all he was exercised about this poor girl whose story Sophy
had been telling.  If what the old woman believed was true,--and it had
too much semblance of probability,--what became of his theory of
ingrained moral obliquity applied to such a case?  If by the visitation
of God a person receives any injury which impairs the intellect or the
moral perceptions, is it not monstrous to judge such a person by our
common working standards of right and wrong? Certainly, everybody will
answer, in cases where there is a palpable organic change brought about,
as when a blow on the head produces insanity.  Fools!  How long will it
be before we shall learn that for every wound which betrays itself to the
sight by a scar, there are a thousand unseen mutilations that cripple,
each of them, some one or more of our highest faculties?  If what Sophy
told and believed was the real truth, what prayers could be agonizing
enough, what tenderness could be deep enough, for this poor, lost,
blighted, hapless, blameless child of misfortune, struck by such a doom
as perhaps no living creature in all the sisterhood of humanity shared
with her?

The minister thought these matters over until his mind was bewildered
with doubts and tossed to and fro on that stormy deep of thought heaving
forever beneath the conflict of windy dogmas.  He laid by his old sermon.
He put back a pile of old commentators with their eyes and mouths and
hearts full of the dust of the schools.  Then he opened the book of
Genesis at the eighteenth chapter and read that remarkable argument of
Abraham's with his Maker in which he boldly appeals to first principles.
He took as his text, "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" and
began to write his sermon, afterwards so famous, "On the Obligations of
an Infinite Creator to a Finite Creature."

It astonished the good people, who had been accustomed so long to repeat
mechanically their Oriental hyperboles of self-abasement, to hear their
worthy minister maintaining that the dignified attitude of the old
Patriarch, insisting on what was reasonable and fair with reference to
his fellow-creatures, was really much more respectful to his Maker, and a
great deal manlier and more to his credit, than if he had yielded the
whole matter, and pretended that men had not rights as well as duties.
The same logic which had carried him to certain conclusions with
reference to human nature, this same irresistible logic carried him
straight on from his text until he arrived at those other results, which
not only astonished his people, as was said, but surprised himself.  He
went so far in defence of the rights of man, that he put his foot into
several heresies, for which men had been burned so often, it was time, if
ever it could be, to acknowledge the demonstration of the argumentum ad
ignem.  He did not believe in the responsibility of idiots.  He did not
believe a new-born infant was morally answerable for other people's acts.
He thought a man with a crooked spine would never be called to account
for not walking erect.  He thought if the crook was in his brain, instead
of his back, he could not fairly be blamed for any consequence of this
natural defect, whatever lawyers or divines might call it.  He argued,
that, if a person inherited a perfect mind, body, and disposition, and
had perfect teaching from infancy, that person could do nothing more than
keep the moral law perfectly.  But supposing that the Creator allows a
person to be born with an hereditary or ingrafted organic tendency, and
then puts this person into the hands of teachers incompetent or
positively bad, is not what is called sin or transgression of the law
necessarily involved in the premises?  Is not a Creator bound to guard
his children against the ruin which inherited ignorance might entail on
them?  Would it be fair for a parent to put into a child's hands the
title-deeds to all its future possessions, and a bunch of matches?  And
are not men children, nay, babes, in the eye of Omniscience?--The
minister grew bold in his questions.  Had not he as good right to ask
questions as Abraham?

This was the dangerous vein of speculation in which the Reverend Doctor
Honeywood found himself involved, as a consequence of the suggestions
forced upon him by old Sophy's communication.  The truth was, the good
man had got so humanized by mixing up with other people in various
benevolent schemes, that, the very moment he could escape from his old
scholastic abstractions, he took the side of humanity instinctively, just
as the Father of the Faithful did,--all honor be to the noble old
Patriarch for insisting on the worth of an honest man, and making the
best terms he could for a very ill-conditioned metropolis, which might
possibly, however, have contained ten righteous people, for whose sake it
should be spared!

The consequence of all this was, that he was in a singular and seemingly
self-contradictory state of mind when he took his hat and cane and went
forth to call on his heretical brother.  The old minister took it for
granted that the Reverend Mr. Fairweather knew the private history of his
parishioner's family.  He did not reflect that there are griefs men never
put into words,--that there are fears which must not be spoken,--intimate
matters of consciousness which must be carried, as bullets which have
been driven deep into the living tissues are sometimes carried, for a
whole lifetime,--encysted griefs, if we may borrow the chirurgeon's term,
never to be reached, never to be seen, never to be thrown out, but to go
into the dust with the frame that bore them about with it, during long
years of anguish, known only to the sufferer and his Maker.  Dudley
Venner had talked with his minister about this child of his.  But he had
talked cautiously, feeling his way for sympathy, looking out for those
indications of tact and judgment which would warrant him in some partial
communication, at least, of the origin of his doubts and fears, and never
finding them.

There was something about the Reverend Mr. Fairweather which repressed
all attempts at confidential intercourse.  What this something was,
Dudley Venner could hardly say; but he felt it distinctly, and it sealed
his lips.  He never got beyond certain generalities connected with
education and religious instruction.  The minister could not help
discovering, however, that there were difficulties connected with this
girl's management, and he heard enough outside of the family to convince
him that she had manifested tendencies, from an early age, at variance
with the theoretical opinions he was in the habit of preaching, and in a
dim way of holding for truth, as to the natural dispositions of the human
being.

About this terrible fact of congenital obliquity his new beliefs began to
cluster as a centre, and to take form as a crystal around its nucleus.
Still, he might perhaps have struggled against them, had it not been for
the little Roman Catholic chapel he passed every Sunday, on his way to
the meeting-house.  Such a crowd of worshippers, swarming into the pews
like bees, filling all the aisles, running over at the door like berries
heaped too full in the measure,--some kneeling on the steps, some
standing on the sidewalk, hats off, heads down, lips moving, some looking
on devoutly from the other side of the street!  Oh, could he have
followed his own Bridget, maid of all work, into the heart of that
steaming throng, and bowed his head while the priests intoned their Latin
prayers! could he have snuffed up the cloud of frankincense, and felt
that he was in the great ark which holds the better half of the Christian
world, while all around it are wretched creatures, some struggling
against the waves in leaky boats, and some on ill-connected rafts, and
some with their heads just above water, thinking to ride out the flood
which is to sweep the earth clean of sinners, upon their own private,
individual life-preservers!

Such was the present state of mind of the Reverend Chauncy Fairweather,
when his clerical brother called upon him to talk over the questions to
which old Sophy had called his attention.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE REVEREND DOCTOR CALLS ON BROTHER FAIRWEATHER.

For the last few months, while all these various matters were going on in
Rockland, the Reverend Chauncy Fairweather had been busy with the records
of ancient councils and the writings of the early fathers.  The more he
read, the more discontented he became with the platform upon which he and
his people were standing.  They and he were clearly in a minority, and
his deep inward longing to be with the majority was growing into an
engrossing passion.  He yearned especially towards the good old
unquestioning, authoritative Mother Church, with her articles of faith
which took away the necessity for private judgment, with her traditional
forms and ceremonies, and her whole apparatus of stimulants and anodynes.

About this time he procured a breviary and kept it in his desk under the
loose papers.  He sent to a Catholic bookstore and obtained a small
crucifix suspended from a string of beads.  He ordered his new coat to be
cut very narrow in the collar and to be made single-breasted.  He began
an informal series of religious conversations with Miss O'Brien, the
young person of Irish extraction already referred to as Bridget, maid of
all work.  These not proving very satisfactory, he managed to fall in
with Father McShane, the Catholic priest of the Rockland church.

Father McShane encouraged his nibble very scientifically.  It would be
such a fine thing to bring over one of those Protestant heretics, and a
"liberal" one too!--not that there was any real difference between them,
but it sounded better, to say that one of these rationalizing
free-and-equal religionists had been made a convert than any of those
half-way Protestants who were the slaves of catechisms instead of
councils, and of commentators instead of popes. The subtle priest played
his disciple with his finest tackle.  It was hardly necessary: when
anything or anybody wishes to be caught, a bare hook and a coarse line
are all that is needed.

If a man has a genuine, sincere, hearty wish to get rid of his liberty,
if he is really bent upon becoming a slave, nothing can stop him.  And
the temptation is to some natures a very great one. Liberty is often a
heavy burden on a man.  It involves that necessity for perpetual choice
which is the kind of labor men have always dreaded.  In common life we
shirk it by forming habits, which take the place of self-determination.
In politics party-organization saves us the pains of much thinking before
deciding how to cast our vote.  In religious matters there are great
multitudes watching us perpetually, each propagandist ready with his
bundle of finalities, which having accepted we may be at peace.  The more
absolute the submission demanded, the stronger the temptation becomes to
those who have been long tossed among doubts and conflicts.

So it is that in all the quiet bays which indent the shores of the great
ocean of thought, at every sinking wharf, we see moored the hulks and the
razees of enslaved or half-enslaved intelligences. They rock peacefully
as children in their cradles on the subdued swell which comes feebly in
over the bar at the harbor's mouth, slowly crusting with barnacles,
pulling at their iron cables as if they really wanted to be free; but
better contented to remain bound as they are.  For these no more the
round unwalled horizon of the open sea, the joyous breeze aloft, the
furrow, the foam, the sparkle, that track the rushing keel!  They have
escaped the dangers of the wave, and lie still henceforth, evermore.
Happiest of souls, if lethargy is bliss, and palsy the chief beatitude!

America owes its political freedom to religious Protestantism.  But
political freedom is reacting on religious prescription with still
mightier force.  We wonder, therefore, when we find a soul which was born
to a full sense of individual liberty, an unchallenged right of
self-determination on every new alleged truth offered to its
intelligence, voluntarily surrendering any portion of its liberty to a
spiritual dictatorship which always proves to rest, in the last analysis,
on a majority vote, nothing more nor less, commonly an old one, passed in
those barbarous times when men cursed and murdered each other for
differences of opinion, and of course were not in a condition to settle
the beliefs of a comparatively civilized community.

In our disgust, we are liable to be intolerant.  We forget that weakness
is not in itself a sin.  We forget that even cowardice may call for our
most lenient judgment, if it spring from innate infirmity, Who of us does
not look with great tenderness on the young chieftain in the "Fair Maid
of Perth," when he confesses his want of courage?  All of us love
companionship and sympathy; some of us may love them too much.  All of us
are more or less imaginative in our theology.

Some of us may find the aid of material symbols a comfort, if not a
necessity.  The boldest thinker may have his moments of languor and
discouragement, when he feels as if he could willingly exchange faiths
with the old beldame crossing herself at the cathedral-door,--nay, that,
if he could drop all coherent thought, and lie in the flowery meadow with
the brown-eyed solemnly unthinking cattle, looking up to the sky, and all
their simple consciousness staining itself blue, then down to the grass,
and life turning to a mere greenness, blended with confused scents of
herbs,--no individual mind-movement such as men are teased with, but the
great calm cattle-sense of all time and all places that know the milky
smell of herds,--if he could be like these, he would be content to be
driven home by the cow-boy, and share the grassy banquet of the king of
ancient Babylon.  Let us be very generous, then, in our judgment of those
who leave the front ranks of thought for the company of the meek
non-combatants who follow with the baggage and provisions.  Age, illness,
too much wear and tear, a half-formed paralysis, may bring any of us to
this pass.  But while we can think and maintain the rights of our own
individuality against every human combination, let us not forget to
caution all who are disposed to waver that there is a cowardice which is
criminal, and a longing for rest which it is baseness to indulge.  God
help him, over whose dead soul in his living body must be uttered the sad
supplication, Requiescat in pace!

A knock at the Reverend Mr. Fairweather's study door called his eyes from
the book on which they were intent.  He looked up, as if expecting a
welcome guest.

The Reverend Pierrepont Honeywood, D. D., entered the study of the
Reverend Chauncy Fairweather.  He was not the expected guest.  Mr.
Fairweather slipped the book he was reading into a half-open drawer, and
pushed in the drawer.  He slid something which rattled under a paper
lying on the table.  He rose with a slight change of color, and welcomed,
a little awkwardly, his unusual visitor.

"Good-evening, Brother Fairweather!" said the Reverend Doctor, in a very
cordial, good-humored way.  "I hope I am not spoiling one of those
eloquent sermons I never have a chance to hear."

"Not at all, not at all," the younger clergyman answered, in a languid
tone, with a kind of habitual half-querulousness which belonged to
it,--the vocal expression which we meet with now and then, and which says
as plainly as so many words could say it, "I am a suffering individual.
I am persistently undervalued, wronged, and imposed upon by mankind and
the powers of the universe generally. But I endure all.  I endure you.
Speak.  I listen.  It is a burden to me, but I even approve.  I sacrifice
myself.  Behold this movement of my lips!  It is a smile."

The Reverend Doctor knew this forlorn way of Mr. Fairweather's, and was
not troubled by it.  He proceeded to relate the circumstances of his
visit from the old black woman, and the fear she was in about the young
girl, who being a parishioner of Mr. Fairweather's, he had thought it
best to come over and speak to him about old Sophy's fears and fancies.

In telling the old woman's story, he alluded only vaguely to those
peculiar circumstances to which she had attributed so much importance,
taking it for granted that the other minister must be familiar with the
whole series of incidents she had related.  The old minister was
mistaken, as we have before seen.  Mr. Fairweather had been settled in
the place only about ten years, and, if he had heard a strange hint now
and then about Elsie, had never considered it as anything more than idle
and ignorant, if not malicious, village-gossip.  All that he fully
understood was that this had been a perverse and unmanageable child, and
that the extraordinary care which had been bestowed on her had been so
far thrown away that she was a dangerous, self-willed girl, whom all
feared and almost all shunned, as if she carried with her some malignant
influence.

He replied, therefore, after hearing the story, that Elsie had always
given trouble.  There seemed to be a kind of natural obliquity about her.
Perfectly unaccountable.  A very dark case.  Never amenable to good
influences.  Had sent her good books from the Sunday-school library.
Remembered that she tore out the frontispiece of one of them, and kept
it, and flung the book out of the window.  It was a picture of Eve's
temptation; and he recollected her saying that Eve was a good woman,--and
she'd have done just so, if she'd been there. A very sad child, very sad;
bad from infancy.  He had talked himself bold, and said all at once,
"Doctor, do you know I am almost ready to accept your doctrine of the
congenital sinfulness of human nature? I am afraid that is the only thing
which goes to the bottom of the difficulty."

The old minister's face did not open so approvingly as Mr. Fairweather
had expected.

"Why, yes,--well,--many find comfort in it,--I believe;--there is much to
be said,--there are many bad people,--and bad children,--I can't be so
sure about bad babies,--though they cry very malignantly at
times,--especially if they have the stomach-ache. But I really don't know
how to condemn this poor Elsie; she may have impulses that act in her
like instincts in the lower animals, and so not come under the bearing of
our ordinary rules of judgment."

"But this depraved tendency, Doctor,--this unaccountable perverseness.
My dear Sir, I am afraid your school is in the right about human nature.
Oh, those words of the Psalmist, 'shapen in iniquity,' and the rest!
What are we to do with them,--we who teach that the soul of a child is an
unstained white tablet?"

"King David was very subject to fits of humility, and much given to
self-reproaches," said the Doctor, in a rather dry way.  "We owe you and
your friends a good deal for calling attention to the natural graces,
which, after all, may, perhaps, be considered as another form of
manifestation of the divine influence.  Some of our writers have pressed
rather too hard on the tendencies of the human soul toward evil as such.
It maybe questioned whether these views have not interfered with the
sound training of certain young persons, sons of clergymen and others.  I
am nearer of your mind about the possibility of educating children so
that they shall become good Christians without any violent transition.
That is what I should hope for from bringing them up 'in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord.'"

The younger minister looked puzzled, but presently answered, "Possibly we
may have called attention to some neglected truths; but, after all, I
fear we must go to the old school, if we want to get at the root of the
matter.  I know there is an outward amiability about many young persons,
some young girls especially, that seems like genuine goodness; but I have
been disposed of late to lean toward your view, that these human
affections, as we see them in our children,--ours, I say, though I have
not the fearful responsibility of training any of my own,--are only a
kind of disguised and sinful selfishness."

The old minister groaned in spirit.  His heart had been softened by the
sweet influences of children and grandchildren.  He thought of a
half-sized grave in the burial-ground, and the fine, brave, noble-hearted
boy he laid in it thirty years before,--the sweet, cheerful child who had
made his home all sunshine until the day when he was brought into it, his
long curls dripping, his fresh lips purpled in death,--foolish dear
little blessed creature to throw himself into the deep water to save the
drowning boy, who clung about him and carried him under!  Disguised
selfishness!  And his granddaughter too, whose disguised selfishness was
the light of his household!

"Don't call it my view!" he said.  "Abstractly, perhaps, all natures may
be considered vitiated; but practically, as I see it in life, the divine
grace keeps pace with the perverted instincts from infancy in many
natures.  Besides, this perversion itself may often be disease, bad
habits transmitted, like drunkenness, or some hereditary misfortune, as
with this Elsie we were talking about."

The younger minister was completely mystified. At every step he made
towards the Doctor's recognized theological position, the Doctor took
just one step towards his.  They would cross each other soon at this
rate, and might as well exchange pulpits,--as Colonel Sprowle once wished
they would, it may be remembered.

The Doctor, though a much clearer-headed man, was almost equally puzzled.
He turned the conversation again upon Elsie, and endeavored to make her
minister feel the importance of bringing every friendly influence to bear
upon her at this critical period of her life.  His sympathies did not
seem so lively as the Doctor could have wished. Perhaps he had vastly
more important objects of solicitude in his own spiritual interests.

A knock at the door interrupted them.  The Reverend Mr. Fairweather rose
and went towards it.  As he passed the table, his coat caught something,
which came rattling to the floor.  It was a crucifix with a string of
beads attached.  As he opened the door, the Milesian features of Father
McShane presented themselves, and from their centre proceeded the
clerical benediction in Irish-sounding Latin, Pax vobiscum!

The Reverend Doctor Honeywood rose and left the priest and his disciple
together.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE SPIDER ON HIS THREAD.

There was nobody, then, to counsel poor Elsie, except her father, who had
learned to let her have her own way so as not to disturb such relations
as they had together, and the old black woman, who had a real, though
limited influence over the girl.  Perhaps she did not need counsel.  To
look upon her, one might well suppose that she was competent to defend
herself against any enemy she was like to have. That glittering, piercing
eye was not to be softened by a few smooth words spoken in low tones,
charged with the common sentiments which win their way to maidens'
hearts.  That round, lithe, sinuous figure was as full of dangerous life
as ever lay under the slender flanks and clean-shaped limbs of a panther.

There were particular times when Elsie was in such a mood that it must
have been a bold person who would have intruded upon her with reproof or
counsel.  "This is one of her days," old Sophy would say quietly to her
father, and he would, as far as possible, leave her to herself.  These
days were more frequent, as old Sophy's keen, concentrated watchfulness
had taught her, at certain periods of the year.  It was in the heats of
summer that they were most common and most strongly characterized.  In
winter, on the other hand, she was less excitable, and even at times
heavy and as if chilled and dulled in her sensibilities.  It was a
strange, paroxysmal kind of life that belonged to her.  It seemed to come
and go with the sunlight.  All winter long she would be comparatively
quiet, easy to manage, listless, slow in her motions; her eye would lose
something of its strange lustre; and the old nurse would feel so little
anxiety, that her whole expression and aspect would show the change, and
people would say to her, "Why, Sophy, how young you're looking!"

As the spring came on, Elsie would leave the fireside, have her
tiger-skin spread in the empty southern chamber next the wall, and lie
there basking for whole hours in the sunshine.  As the season warmed, the
light would kindle afresh in her eyes, and the old woman's sleep would
grow restless again,--for she knew, that, so long as the glitter was
fierce in the girl's eyes, there was no trusting her impulses or
movements.

At last, when the veins of the summer were hot and swollen, and the
juices of all the poison-plants and the blood of all the creatures that
feed upon them had grown thick and strong,--about the time when the
second mowing was in hand, and the brown, wet-faced men were following up
the scythes as they chased the falling waves of grass, (falling as the
waves fall on sickle-curved beaches; the foam-flowers dropping as the
grass-flowers drop,--with sharp semivowel consonantal sounds,--frsh,--for
that is the way the sea talks, and leaves all pure vowel-sounds for the
winds to breathe over it, and all mutes to the unyielding earth,)--about
this time of over-ripe midsummer, the life of Elsie seemed fullest of its
malign and restless instincts. This was the period of the year when the
Rockland people were most cautious of wandering in the leafier coverts
which skirted the base of The Mountain, and the farmers liked to wear
thick, long boots, whenever they went into the bushes.  But Elsie was
never so much given to roaming over The Mountain as at this season; and
as she had grown more absolute and uncontrollable, she was as like to
take the night as the day for her rambles.

At this season, too, all her peculiar tastes in dress and ornament came
out in a more striking way than at other times.  She was never so superb
as then, and never so threatening in her scowling beauty. The barred
skirts she always fancied showed sharply beneath her diaphanous muslins;
the diamonds often glittered on her breast as if for her own pleasure
rather than to dazzle others; the asp-like bracelet hardly left her arm.
She was never seen without some necklace,--either the golden cord she
wore at the great party, or a chain of mosaics, or simply a ring of
golden scales.  Some said that Elsie always slept in a necklace, and that
when she died she was to be buried in one.  It was a fancy of hers,--but
many thought there was a reason for it.

Nobody watched Elsie with a more searching eye than her cousin, Dick
Venner.  He had kept more out of her way of late, it is true, but there
was not a movement she made which he did not carefully observe just so
far as he could without exciting her suspicion.  It was plain enough to
him that the road to fortune was before him, and that the first thing was
to marry Elsie.  What course he should take with her, or with others
interested, after marrying her, need not be decided in a hurry.

He had now done all he could expect to do at present in the way of
conciliating the other members of the household.  The girl's father
tolerated him, if he did not even like him.  Whether he suspected his
project or not Dick did not feel sure; but it was something to have got a
foothold in the house, and to have overcome any prepossession against him
which his uncle might have entertained.  To be a good listener and a bad
billiard-player was not a very great sacrifice to effect this object.
Then old Sophy could hardly help feeling well-disposed towards him, after
the gifts he had bestowed on her and the court he had paid her.  These
were the only persons on the place of much importance to gain over.  The
people employed about the house and farm-lands had little to do with
Elsie, except to obey her without questioning her commands.

Mr. Richard began to think of reopening his second parallel.  But he had
lost something of the coolness with which he had begun his system of
operations.  The more he had reflected upon the matter, the more he had
convinced himself that this was his one great chance in life. If he
suffered this girl to escape him, such an opportunity could hardly, in
the nature of things, present itself a second time.  Only one life
between Elsie and her fortune,--and lives are so uncertain! The girl
might not suit him as a wife.  Possibly.  Time enough to find out after
he had got her.  In short, he must have the property, and Elsie Venner,
as she was to go with it,--and then, if he found it convenient and
agreeable to, lead a virtuous life, he would settle down and raise
children and vegetables; but if he found it inconvenient and
disagreeable, so much the worse for those who made it so.  Like many
other persons, he was not principled against virtue, provided virtue were
a better investment than its opposite; but he knew that there might be
contingencies in which the property would be better without its
incumbrances, and he contemplated this conceivable problem in the light
of all its possible solutions.

One thing Mr. Richard could not conceal from himself: Elsie had some new
cause of indifference, at least, if not of aversion to him.  With the
acuteness which persons who make a sole business of their own interest
gain by practice, so that fortune-hunters are often shrewd where real
lovers are terribly simple, he fixed at once on the young man up at the
school where the girl had been going of late, as probably at the bottom
of it.

"Cousin Elsie in love!"  so he communed with himself upon his lonely
pillow.  "In love with a Yankee schoolmaster!  What else can it be? Let
him look out for himself!  He'll stand but a bad chance between us.  What
makes you think she's in love with him?  Met her walking with him.  Don't
like her looks and ways;--she's thinking about something, anyhow.  Where
does she get those books she is reading so often?  Not out of our
library, that 's certain.  If I could have ten minutes' peep into her
chamber now, I would find out where she got them, and what mischief she
was up to."

At that instant, as if some tributary demon had heard his wish, a shape
which could be none but Elsie's flitted through a gleam of moonlight into
the shadow of the trees.  She was setting out on one of her midnight
rambles.

Dick felt his heart stir in its place, and presently his cheeks flushed
with the old longing for an adventure.  It was not much to invade a young
girl's deserted chamber, but it would amuse a wakeful hour, and tell him
some little matters he wanted to know.  The chamber he slept in was over
the room which Elsie chiefly occupied at this season.  There was no great
risk of his being seen or heard, if he ventured down-stairs to her
apartment.

Mr. Richard Venner, in the pursuit of his interesting project, arose and
lighted a lamp.  He wrapped himself in a dressing-gown and thrust his
feet into a pair of cloth slippers.  He stole carefully down the stair,
and arrived safely at the door of Elsie's room.

The young lady had taken the natural precaution to leave it fastened,
carrying the key with her, no doubt,--unless; indeed, she had got out by
the window, which was not far from the ground.  Dick could get in at this
window easily enough, but he did not like the idea of leaving his
footprints in the flower-bed just under it.  He returned to his own
chamber, and held a council of war with himself.

He put his head out of his own window and looked at that beneath.  It was
open.  He then went to one of his trunks, which he unlocked, and began
carefully removing its contents.  What these were we need not stop to
mention,--only remarking that there were dresses of various patterns,
which might afford an agreeable series of changes, and in certain
contingencies prove eminently useful.  After removing a few of these, he
thrust his hand to the very bottom of the remaining pile and drew out a
coiled strip of leather many yards in length, ending in a noose,--a
tough, well-seasoned lasso, looking as if it had seen service and was
none the worse for it.  He uncoiled a few yards of this and fastened it
to the knob of a door.  Then he threw the loose end out of the window so
that it should hang by the open casement of Elsie's room.  By this he let
himself down opposite her window, and with a slight effort swung himself
inside the room.  He lighted a match, found a candle, and, having lighted
that, looked curiously about him, as Clodius might have done when he
smuggled himself in among the Vestals.

Elsie's room was almost as peculiar as her dress and ornaments.  It was a
kind of museum of objects, such as the woods are full of to those who
have eyes to see them, but many of them such as only few could hope to
reach, even if they knew where to look for them. Crows' nests, which are
never found but in the tall trees, commonly enough in the forks of
ancient hemlocks, eggs of rare birds, which must have taken a quick eye
and a hard climb to find and get hold of, mosses and ferns of unusual
aspect, and quaint monstrosities of vegetable growth, such as Nature
delights in, showed that Elsie had her tastes and fancies like any
naturalist or poet.

Nature, when left to her own freaks in the forest, is grotesque and
fanciful to the verge of license, and beyond it.  The foliage of trees
does not always require clipping to make it look like an image of life.
From those windows at Canoe Meadow, among the mountains, we could see all
summer long a lion rampant, a Shanghai chicken, and General Jackson on
horseback, done by Nature in green leaves, each with a single tree.  But
to Nature's tricks with boughs and roots and smaller vegetable growths
there is no end.  Her fancy is infinite, and her humor not always
refined.  There is a perpetual reminiscence of animal life in her rude
caricatures, which sometimes actually reach the point of imitating the
complete human figure, as in that extraordinary specimen which nobody
will believe to be genuine, except the men of science, and of which the
discreet reader may have a glimpse by application in the proper quarter.

Elsie had gathered so many of these sculpture-like monstrosities, that
one might have thought she had robbed old Sophy's grandfather of his
fetishes.  They helped to give her room a kind of enchanted look, as if a
witch had her home in it.  Over the fireplace was a long, staff-like
branch, strangled in the spiral coils of one of those vines which strain
the smaller trees in their clinging embraces, sinking into the bark until
the parasite becomes almost identified with its support.  With these
sylvan curiosities were blended objects of art, some of them not less
singular, but others showing a love for the beautiful in form and color,
such as a girl of fine organization and nice culture might naturally be
expected to feel and to indulge, in adorning her apartment.

All these objects, pictures, bronzes, vases, and the rest, did not detain
Mr. Richard Veneer very long, whatever may have been his sensibilities to
art.  He was more curious about books and papers.  A copy of Keats lay on
the table.  He opened it and read the name of Bernard C. Langdon on the
blank leaf.  An envelope was on the table with Elsie's name written in a
similar hand; but the envelope was empty, and he could not find the note
it contained.  Her desk was locked, and it would not be safe to tamper
with it.  He had seen enough; the girl received books and notes from this
fellow up at the school, this usher, this Yankee quill-driver;--he was
aspiring to become the lord of the Dudley domain, then, was he?

Elsie had been reasonably careful.  She had locked up her papers,
whatever they might be.  There was little else that promised to reward
his curiosity, but he cast his eye on everything.  There was a
clasp-Bible among her books.  Dick wondered if she ever unclasped it.
There was a book of hymns; it had her name in it, and looked as if it
might have been often read;--what the diablo had Elsie to do with hymns?

Mr. Richard Venner was in an observing and analytical state of mind, it
will be noticed, or he might perhaps have been touched with the innocent
betrayals of the poor girl's chamber.  Had she, after all, some human
tenderness in her heart?  That was not the way he put the question,--but
whether she would take seriously to this schoolmaster, and if she did,
what would be the neatest and surest and quickest way of putting a stop
to all that nonsense.  All this, however, he could think over more safely
in his own quarters.  So he stole softly to the window, and, catching the
end of the leathern thong, regained his own chamber and drew in the
lasso.

It needs only a little jealousy to set a man on who is doubtful in love
or wooing, or to make him take hold of his courting in earnest. As soon
as Dick had satisfied himself that the young schoolmaster was his rival
in Elsie's good graces, his whole thoughts concentrated themselves more
than ever on accomplishing his great design of securing her for himself.
There was no time to be lost.  He must come into closer relations with
her, so as to withdraw her thoughts from this fellow, and to find out
more exactly what was the state of her affections, if she had any.  So he
began to court her company again, to propose riding with her, to sing to
her, to join her whenever she was strolling about the grounds, to make
himself agreeable, according to the ordinary understanding of that
phrase, in every way which seemed to promise a chance for succeeding in
that amiable effort.

The girl treated him more capriciously than ever.  She would be sullen
and silent, or she would draw back fiercely at some harmless word or
gesture, or she would look at him with her eyes narrowed in such a
strange way and with such a wicked light in them that Dick swore to
himself they were too much for him, and would leave her for the moment.
Yet she tolerated him, almost as a matter of necessity, and sometimes
seemed to take a kind of pleasure in trying her power upon him.  This he
soon found out, and humored her in the fancy that she could exercise a
kind of fascination over him, though there were times in which he
actually felt an influence he could not understand, an effect of some
peculiar expression about her, perhaps, but still centring in those
diamond eyes of hers which it made one feel so curiously to look into.

Whether Elsie saw into his object or not was more than he could tell. His
idea was, after having conciliated the good-will of all about her as far
as possible, to make himself first a habit and then a necessity with the
girl,--not to spring any trap of a declaration upon her until tolerance
had grown into such a degree of inclination as her nature was like to
admit.  He had succeeded in the first part of his plan.  He was at
liberty to prolong his visit at his own pleasure.  This was not strange;
these three persons, Dudley Venner, his daughter, and his nephew,
represented all that remained of an old and honorable family.  Had Elsie
been like other girls, her father might have been less willing to
entertain a young fellow like Dick as an inmate; but he had long outgrown
all the slighter apprehensions which he might have had in common with all
parents, and followed rather than led the imperious instincts of his
daughter.  It was not a question of sentiment, but of life and death, or
more than that,--some dark ending, perhaps, which would close the
history of his race with disaster and evil report upon the lips of all
coming generations.

As to the thought of his nephew's making love to his daughter, it had
almost passed from his mind.  He had been so long in the habit of looking
at Elsie as outside of all common influences and exceptional in the law
of her nature, that it was difficult for him to think of her as a girl to
be fallen in love with.  Many persons are surprised, when others court
their female relatives; they know them as good young or old women
enough,--aunts, sisters, nieces, daughters, whatever they may be,--but
never think of anybody's falling in love with them, any more than of
their being struck by lightning.  But in this case there were special
reasons, in addition to the common family delusion,--reasons which seemed
to make it impossible that she should attract a suitor.  Who would dare
to marry Elsie?  No, let her have the pleasure, if it was one, at any
rate the wholesome excitement, of companionship; it might save her from
lapsing into melancholy or a worse form of madness.  Dudley Venner had a
kind of superstition, too, that, if Elsie could only outlive three
septenaries, twenty-one years, so that, according to the prevalent idea,
her whole frame would have been thrice made over, counting from her
birth, she would revert to the natural standard of health of mind and
feelings from which she had been so long perverted.  The thought of any
other motive than love being sufficient to induce Richard to become her
suitor had not occurred to him.  He had married early, at that happy
period when interested motives are least apt to influence the choice; and
his single idea of marriage was, that it was the union of persons
naturally drawn towards each other by some mutual attraction.  Very
simple, perhaps; but he had lived lonely for many years since his wife's
death, and judged the hearts of others, most of all of his brother's son,
by his own.  He had often thought whether, in case of Elsie's dying or
being necessarily doomed to seclusion, he might not adopt this nephew and
make him his heir; but it had not occurred to him that Richard might wish
to become his son-in-law for the sake of his property.

It is very easy to criticise other people's modes of dealing with their
children.  Outside observers see results; parents see processes.  They
notice the trivial movements and accents which betray the blood of this
or that ancestor; they can detect the irrepressible movement of
hereditary impulse in looks and acts which mean nothing to the common
observer.  To be a parent is almost to be a fatalist.  This boy sits with
legs crossed, just as his uncle used to whom he never saw; his
grandfathers both died before he was born, but he has the movement of the
eyebrows which we remember in one of them, and the gusty temper of three
different generations, can tell pretty nearly the range of possibilities
and the limitations of a child, actual or potential, of a given
stock,--errors excepted always, because children of the same stock are
not bred just alike, because the traits of some less known ancestor are
liable to break out at any time, and because each human being has, after
all, a small fraction of individuality about him which gives him a
flavor, so that he is distinguishable from others by his friends or in a
court of justice, and which occasionally makes a genius or a saint or a
criminal of him.  It is well that young persons cannot read these fatal
oracles of Nature.  Blind impulse is her highest wisdom, after all.  We
make our great jump, and then she takes the bandage off our eyes.  That
is the way the broad sea-level of average is maintained, and the
physiological democracy is enabled to fight against the principle of
selection which would disinherit all the weaker children.  The
magnificent constituency of mediocrities of which the world is made
up,--the people without biographies, whose lives have made a clear
solution in the fluid menstruum of time, instead of being precipitated in
the opaque sediment of history--

But this is a narrative, and not a disquisition.




CHAPTER XX.

FROM WITHOUT AND FROM WITHIN.

There were not wanting people who accused Dudley VENNER of weakness and
bad judgment in his treatment of his daughter.  Some were of opinion that
the great mistake was in not "breaking her will" when she was a little
child.  There was nothing the matter with her, they said, but that she
had been spoiled by indulgence.  If they had had the charge of her,
they'd have brought her down.  She'd got the upperhand of her father now;
but if he'd only taken hold of her in season!  There are people who think
that everything may be done, if the doer, be he educator or physician, be
only called "in season." No doubt,--but in season would often be a
hundred or two years before the child was born; and people never send so
early as that.

The father of Elsie Veneer knew his duties and his difficulties too well
to trouble himself about anything others might think or say.  So soon as
he found that he could not govern his child, he gave his life up to
following her and protecting her as far as he could.  It was a stern and
terrible trial for a man of acute sensibility, and not without force of
intellect and will, and the manly ambition for himself and his
family-name which belonged to his endowments and his position.  Passive
endurance is the hardest trial to persons of such a nature.

What made it still more a long martyrdom was the necessity for bearing
his cross in utter loneliness.  He could not tell his griefs. He could
not talk of them even with those who knew their secret spring.  His
minister had the unsympathetic nature which is common in the meaner sort
of devotees,--persons who mistake spiritual selfishness for sanctity, and
grab at the infinite prize of the great Future and Elsewhere with the
egotism they excommunicate in its hardly more odious forms of avarice and
self-indulgence.  How could he speak with the old physician and the old
black woman about a sorrow and a terror which but to name was to strike
dumb the lips of Consolation?

In the dawn of his manhood he had found that second consciousness for
which young men and young women go about looking into each other's faces,
with their sweet, artless aim playing in every feature, and making them
beautiful to each other, as to all of us.  He had found his other self
early, before he had grown weary in the search and wasted his freshness
in vain longings: the lot of many, perhaps we may say of most, who
infringe the patent of our social order by intruding themselves into a
life already upon half allowance of the necessary luxuries of existence.
The life he had led for a brief space was not only beautiful in outward
circumstance, as old Sophy had described it to the Reverend Doctor.  It
was that delicious process of the tuning of two souls to each other,
string by string, not without little half-pleasing discords now and then
when some chord in one or the other proves to be overstrained or
over-lax, but always approaching nearer and nearer to harmony, until they
become at last as two instruments with a single voice.  Something more
than a year of this blissful doubled consciousness had passed over him
when he found himself once more alone,--alone, save for the little
diamond-eyed child lying in the old black woman's arms, with the coral
necklace round--her throat and the rattle in her hand.

He would not die by his own act.  It was not the way in his family. There
may have been other, perhaps better reasons, but this was enough; he did
not come of suicidal stock.  He must live for this child's sake, at any
rate; and yet,--oh, yet, who could tell with what thoughts he looked upon
her?  Sometimes her little features would look placid, and something like
a smile would steal over them; then all his tender feelings would rush
up, into his eyes, and he would put his arms out to take her from the old
woman,--but all at once her eyes would narrow and she would throw her
head back, and a shudder would seize him as he stooped over his
child,--he could not look upon her,--he could not touch his lips to her
cheek; nay, there would sometimes come into his soul such frightful
suggestions that he would hurry from the room lest the hinted thought
should become a momentary madness and he should lift his hand against the
hapless infant which owed him life.

In those miserable days he used to wander all over The Mountain in his
restless endeavor to seek some relief for inward suffering in outward
action.  He had no thought of throwing himself from the summit of any of
the broken cliffs, but he clambered over them recklessly, as having no
particular care for his life.  Sometimes he would go into the accursed
district where the venomous reptiles were always to be dreaded, and court
their worst haunts, and kill all he could come near with a kind of blind
fury which was strange in a person of his gentle nature.

One overhanging cliff was a favorite haunt of his.  It frowned upon his
home beneath in a very menacing way; he noticed slight seams and fissures
that looked ominous;--what would happen, if it broke off some time or
other and came crashing down on the fields and roofs below?  He thought
of such a possible catastrophe with a singular indifference, in fact with
a feeling almost like pleasure.  It would be such a swift and thorough
solution of this great problem of life he was working out in
ever-recurring daily anguish!  The remote possibility of such a
catastrophe had frightened some timid dwellers beneath The Mountain to
other places of residence; here the danger was most imminent, and yet he
loved to dwell upon the chances of its occurrence.  Danger is often the
best counterirritant in cases of mental suffering; he found a solace in
careless exposure of his life, and learned to endure the trials of each
day better by dwelling in imagination on the possibility that it might be
the last for him and the home that was his.

Time, the great consoler, helped these influences, and he gradually fell
into more easy and less dangerous habits of life.  He ceased from his
more perilous rambles.  He thought less of the danger from the great
overhanging rocks and forests; they had hung there for centuries; it was
not very likely they would crash or slide in his time.  He became
accustomed to all Elsie's strange looks and ways. Old Sophy dressed her
with ruffles round her neck, and hunted up the red coral branch with
silver bells which the little toothless Dudleys had bitten upon for a
hundred years.  By an infinite effort, her father forced himself to
become the companion of this child, for whom he had such a mingled
feeling, but whose presence was always a trial to him, and often a
terror.

At a cost which no human being could estimate, he had done his duty, and
in some degree reaped his reward.  Elsie grew up with a kind of filial
feeling for him, such as her nature was capable of.  She never would obey
him; that was not to be looked for.  Commands, threats, punishments, were
out of the question with her; the mere physical effects of crossing her
will betrayed themselves in such changes of expression and manner that it
would have been senseless to attempt to govern her in any such way.
Leaving her mainly to herself, she could be to some extent indirectly
influenced,--not otherwise.  She called her father "Dudley," as if he had
been her brother.  She ordered everybody and would be ordered by none.

Who could know all these things, except the few people of the household?
What wonder, therefore, that ignorant and shallow persons laid the blame
on her father of those peculiarities which were freely talked about,--of
those darker tendencies which were hinted of in whispers?  To all this
talk, so far as it reached him, he was supremely indifferent, not only
with the indifference which all gentlemen feel to the gossip of their
inferiors, but with a charitable calmness which did not wonder or blame.
He knew that his position was not simply a difficult, but an impossible
one, and schooled himself to bear his destiny as well as he might, and
report himself only at Headquarters.

He had grown gentle under this discipline.  His hair was just beginning
to be touched with silver, and his expression was that of habitual
sadness and anxiety.  He had no counsellor, as we have seen, to turn to,
who did not know either too much or too little.  He had no heart to rest
upon and into which he might unburden himself of the secrets and the
sorrows that were aching in his own breast.  Yet he had not allowed
himself to run to waste in the long time since he was left alone to his
trials and fears.  He had resisted the seductions which always beset
solitary men with restless brains overwrought by depressing agencies.  He
disguised no misery to himself with the lying delusion of wine.  He
sought no sleep from narcotics, though he lay with throbbing, wide-open
eyes through all the weary hours of the night.

It was understood between Dudley Veneer and old Doctor Kittredge that
Elsie was a subject of occasional medical observation, on account of
certain mental peculiarities which might end in a permanent affection of
her reason.  Beyond this nothing was said, whatever may have been in the
mind of either.  But Dudley Veneer had studied Elsie's case in the light
of all the books he could find which might do anything towards explaining
it.  As in all cases where men meddle with medical science for a special
purpose, having no previous acquaintance with it, his imagination found
what it wanted in the books he read, and adjusted it to the facts before
him.  So it was he came to cherish those two fancies before alluded to
that the ominous birthmark she had carried from infancy might fade and
become obliterated, and that the age of complete maturity might be
signalized by an entire change in her physical and mental state.  He held
these vague hopes as all of us nurse our only half-believed illusions.
Not for the world would he have questioned his sagacious old medical
friend as to the probability or possibility of their being true.  We are
very shy of asking questions of those who know enough to destroy with one
word the hopes we live on.

In this life of comparative seclusion to which the father had doomed
himself for the sake of his child, he had found time for large and varied
reading.  The learned Judge Thornton confessed himself surprised at the
extent of Dudley Veneer's information.  Doctor Kittredge found that he
was in advance of him in the knowledge of recent physiological
discoveries.  He had taken pains to become acquainted with agricultural
chemistry; and the neighboring farmers owed him some useful hints about
the management of their land.  He renewed his old acquaintance with the
classic authors.  He loved to warm his pulses with Homer and calm them
down with Horace.  He received all manner of new books and periodicals,
and gradually gained an interest in the events of the passing time.  Yet
he remained almost a hermit, not absolutely refusing to see his
neighbors, nor even churlish towards them, but on the other hand not
cultivating any intimate relations with them.

He had retired from the world a young man, little more than a youth,
indeed, with sentiments and aspirations all of them suddenly
extinguished.  The first had bequeathed him a single huge sorrow, the
second a single trying duty.  In due time the anguish had lost something
of its poignancy, the light of earlier and happier memories had begun to
struggle with and to soften its thick darkness, and even that duty which
he had confronted with such an effort had become an endurable habit.

At a period of life when many have been living on the capital of their
acquired knowledge and their youthful stock of sensibilities until their
intellects are really shallower and their hearts emptier than they were
at twenty, Dudley Veneer was stronger in thought and tenderer in soul
than in the first freshness of his youth, when he counted but half his
present years.  He had entered that period which marks the decline of men
who have ceased growing in knowledge and strength: from forty to fifty a
man must move upward, or the natural falling off in the vigor of life
will carry him rapidly downward.  At this time his inward: nature was
richer and deeper than in any earlier period of his life.  If he could
only be summoned to action, he was capable of noble service.  If his
sympathies could only find an outlet, he was never so capable of love as
now; for his natural affections had been gathering in the course of all
these years, and the traces of that ineffaceable calamity of his life
were softened and partially hidden by new growths of thought and feeling,
as the wreck left by a mountainslide is covered over by the gentle
intrusion of the soft-stemmed herbs which will prepare it for the
stronger vegetation that will bring it once more into harmony with the
peaceful slopes around it.

Perhaps Dudley Veneer had not gained so much in worldly wisdom as if he
had been more in society and less in his study.  The indulgence with
which he treated his nephew was, no doubt, imprudent.  A man more in the
habit of dealing with men would have been more guarded with a person with
Dick's questionable story and unquestionable physiognomy.  But he was
singularly unsuspicious, and his natural kindness was an additional
motive to the wish for introducing some variety into the routine of
Elsie's life.

If Dudley Veneer did not know just what he wanted at this period of his
life, there were a great many people in the town of Rockland who thought
they did know.  He had been a widower long enough, "--nigh twenty year,
wa'n't it?  He'd been aout to Spraowles's party,--there wa'n't anything
to hender him why he shouldn't stir raound l'k other folks.  What was the
reason he did n't go abaout to taown-meetin's 'n' Sahbath-meetin's, 'n'
lyceums, 'n' school 'xaminations, 'n' s'prise-parties, 'n' funerals,--and
other entertainments where the still-faced two-story folks were in the
habit of looking round to see if any of the mansion-house gentry were
present?--Fac' was, he was livin' too lonesome daown there at the
mansion-haouse.  Why shouldn't he make up to the Jedge's daughter?  She
was genteel enough for him, and--let's see, haow old was she?
Seven-'n'itwenty,--no, six-'n'-twenty,--born the same year we buried our
little Anny Marl".

There was no possible objection to this arrangement, if the parties
interested had seen fit to make it or even to think of it.  But "Portia,"
as some of the mansion-house people called her, did not happen to awaken
the elective affinities of the lonely widower.  He met her once in a
while, and said to himself that she was a good specimen of the grand
style of woman; and then the image came back to him of a woman not quite
so large, not quite so imperial in her port, not quite so incisive in her
speech, not quite so judicial in her opinions, but with two or three more
joints in her frame, and two or three soft inflections in her voice,
which for some absurd reason or other drew him to her side and so
bewitched him that he told her half his secrets and looked into her eyes
all that he could not tell, in less time than it would have takes him to
discuss the champion paper of the last Quarterly with the admirable
"Portia."  Heu, quanto minus!  How much more was that lost image to him
than all it left on earth!

The study of love is very much like that of meteorology.  We know that
just about so much rain will fall in a season; but on what particular day
it will shower is more than we can tell.  We know that just about so much
love will be made every year in a given population; but who will rain his
young affections upon the heart of whom is not known except to the
astrologers and fortune-tellers.  And why rain falls as it does and why
love is made just as it is are equally puzzling questions.

The woman a man loves is always his own daughter, far more his daughter
than the female children born to him by the common law of life.  It is
not the outside woman, who takes his name, that he loves: before her
image has reached the centre of his consciousness, it has passed through
fifty many-layered nerve-strainers, been churned over by ten thousand
pulse-beats, and reacted upon by millions of lateral impulses which bandy
it about through the mental spaces as a reflection is sent back and
forward in a saloon lined with mirrors.  With this altered image of the
woman before him, his preexisting ideal becomes blended.  The object of
his love is in part the offspring of her legal parents, but more of her
lover's brain. The difference between the real and the ideal objects of
love must not exceed a fixed maximum.  The heart's vision cannot unite
them stereoscopically into a single image, if the divergence passes
certain limits.  A formidable analogy, much in the nature of a proof,
with very serious consequences, which moralists and match-makers would do
well to remember!  Double vision with the eyes of the heart is a
dangerous physiological state, and may lead to missteps and serious
falls.

Whether Dudley Veneer would ever find a breathing image near enough to
his ideal one, to fill the desolate chamber of his heart, or not, was
very doubtful.  Some gracious and gentle woman, whose influence would
steal upon him as the first low words of prayer after that interval of
silent mental supplication known to one of our simpler forms of public
worship, gliding into his consciousness without hurting its old griefs,
herself knowing the chastening of sorrow, and subdued into sweet
acquiescence with the Divine will,--some such woman as this, if Heaven
should send him such, might call him back to the world of happiness, from
which he seemed forever exiled.  He could never again be the young lover
who walked through the garden-alleys all red with roses in the old dead
and buried June of long ago.  He could never forget the bride of his
youth, whose image, growing phantomlike with the lapse of years, hovered
over him like a dream while waking and like a reality in dreams.  But if
it might be in God's good providence that this desolate life should come
under the influence of human affections once more, what an ecstasy of
renewed existence was in store for him!  His life had not all been buried
under that narrow ridge of turf with the white stone at its head.  It
seemed so for a while; but it was not and could not and ought not to be
so.  His first passion had been a true and pure one; there was no spot or
stain upon it.  With all his grief there blended no cruel recollection of
any word or look he would have wished to forget.  All those little
differences, such as young married people with any individual flavor in
their characters must have, if they are tolerably mated, had only added
to the music of existence, as the lesser discords admitted into some
perfect symphony, fitly resolved, add richness and strength to the whole
harmonious movement.  It was a deep wound that Fate had inflicted on him;
nay, it seemed like a mortal one; but the weapon was clean, and its edge
was smooth.  Such wounds must heal with time in healthy natures, whatever
a false sentiment may say, by the wise and beneficent law of our being.
The recollection of a deep and true affection is rather a divine
nourishment for a life to grow strong upon than a poison to destroy it.

Dudley Venner's habitual sadness could not be laid wholly to his early
bereavement.  It was partly the result of the long struggle between
natural affection and duty, on one side, and the involuntary tendencies
these had to overcome, on the other,--between hope and fear, so long in
conflict that despair itself would have been like an anodyne, and he
would have slept upon some final catastrophe with the heavy sleep of a
bankrupt after his failure is proclaimed.  Alas! some new affection might
perhaps rekindle the fires of youth in his heart; but what power could
calm that haggard terror of the parent which rose with every morning's
sun and watched with every evening star,--what power save alone that of
him who comes bearing the inverted torch, and leaving after him only the
ashes printed with his footsteps?




CHAPTER XXI.

THE WIDOW ROWENS GIVES A TEA-PARTY.

There was a good deal of interest felt, as has been said, in the lonely
condition of Dudley Venner in that fine mansion-house of his, and with
that strange daughter, who would never be married, as many people
thought, in spite of all the stories.  The feelings expressed by the good
folks who dated from the time when they "buried aour little Anny Mari',"
and others of that homespun stripe, were founded in reason, after all.
And so it was natural enough that they should be shared by various
ladies, who, having conjugated the verb to live as far as the
preterpluperfect tense, were ready to change one of its vowels and begin
with it in the present indicative.  Unfortunately, there was very little
chance of showing sympathy in its active form for a gentleman who kept
himself so much out of the way as the master of the Dudley Mansion.

Various attempts had been made, from time to time, of late years, to get
him out of his study, which had, for the most part, proved failures.  It
was a surprise, therefore, when he was seen at the Great Party at the
Colonel's.  But it was an encouragement to try him again, and the
consequence had been that he had received a number of notes inviting him
to various smaller entertainments, which, as neither he nor Elsie had any
fancy for them, he had politely declined.

Such was the state of things when he received an invitation to take tea
sociably, with a few friends, at Hyacinth Cottage, the residence of the
Widow Rowens, relict of the late Beeri Rowens, Esquire, better known as
Major Rowens.  Major Rowens was at the time of his decease a promising
officer in the militia, in the direct line of promotion, as his waistband
was getting tighter every year; and, as all the world knows, the
militia-officer who splits off most buttons and fills the largest
sword-belt stands the best chance of rising, or, perhaps we might say,
spreading, to be General.

Major Rowens united in his person certain other traits which help a man
to eminence in the branch of public service referred to.  He ran to high
colors, to wide whiskers, to open pores; he had the saddle-leather skin
common in Englishmen, rarer in Americans,--never found in the Brahmin
caste, oftener in the military and the commodores: observing people know
what is meant; blow the seed-arrows from the white-kid-looking button
which holds them on a dandelion-stalk, and the pricked-pincushion surface
shows you what to look for.  He had the loud gruff voice which implies
the right to command.  He had the thick hand, stubbed fingers, with
bristled pads between their joints, square, broad thumb-nails, and sturdy
limbs, which mark a constitution made to use in rough out-door work.  He
had the never-failing predilection for showy switch-tailed horses that
step high, and sidle about, and act as if they were going to do something
fearful the next minute, in the face of awed and admiring multitudes
gathered at mighty musters or imposing cattle-shows.  He had no
objection, either, to holding the reins in a wagon behind another kind of
horse,--a slouching, listless beast, with a strong slant to his shoulder;
and a notable depth to his quarter and an emphatic angle at the hock, who
commonly walked or lounged along in a lazy trot of five or six miles an
hour; but, if a lively colt happened to come rattling up alongside, or a
brandy-faced old horse-jockey took the road to show off a fast nag, and
threw his dust into the Major's face, would pick his legs up all at once,
and straighten his body out, and swing off into a three-minute gait, in a
way that "Old Blue" himself need not have been ashamed of.

For some reason which must be left to the next generation of professors
to find out, the men who are knowing in horse-flesh have an eye also for,
let a long dash separate the brute creation from the angelic being now to
be named,--for lovely woman.  Of this fact there can be no possible
doubt; and therefore you shall notice, that, if a fast horse trots before
two, one of the twain is apt to be a pretty bit of muliebrity, with
shapes to her, and eyes flying about in all directions.

Major Rowens, at that time Lieutenant of the Rockland Fusileers, had
driven and "traded" horses not a few before he turned his acquired skill
as a judge of physical advantages in another direction.  He knew a neat,
snug hoof, a delicate pastern, a broad haunch, a deep chest, a close
ribbed-up barrel, as well as any other man in the town.  He was not to be
taken in by your thick-jointed, heavy-headed cattle, without any go to
them, that suit a country-parson, nor yet by the "gaanted-up,"
long-legged animals, with all their constitutions bred out of them, such
as rich greenhorns buy and cover up with their plated trappings.

Whether his equine experience was of any use to him in the selection of
the mate with whom he was to go in double harness so long as they both
should live, we need not stop to question.  At any rate, nobody could
find fault with the points of Miss Marilla Van Deusen, to whom he offered
the privilege of becoming Mrs. Rowens.  The Van must have been crossed
out of her blood, for she was an out-and-out brunette, with hair and eyes
black enough for a Mohawk's daughter.  A fine style of woman, with very
striking tints and outlines,--an excellent match for the Lieutenant,
except for one thing.  She was marked by Nature for a widow.  She was
evidently got up for mourning, and never looked so well as in deep black,
with jet ornaments.

The man who should dare to marry her would doom himself; for how could
she become the widow she was bound to be, unless he could retire and give
her a chance?  The Lieutenant lived, however, as we have seen, to become
Captain and then Major, with prospects of further advancement.  But Mrs.
Rowens often said she should never look well in colors.  At last her
destiny fulfilled itself, and the justice of Nature was vindicated.
Major Rowens got overheated galloping about the field on the day of the
Great Muster, and had a rush of blood to the head, according to the
common report,--at any rate, something which stopped him short in his
career of expansion and promotion, and established Mrs. Rowens in her
normal condition of widowhood.

The Widow Rowens was now in the full bloom of ornamental sorrow.  A very
shallow crape bonnet, frilled and froth-like, allowed the parted raven
hair to show its glossy smoothness.  A jet pin heaved upon her bosom with
every sigh of memory, or emotion of unknown origin.  Jet bracelets shone
with every movement of her slender hands, cased in close-fitting black
gloves.  Her sable dress was ridged with manifold flounces, from beneath
which a small foot showed itself from time to time, clad in the same hue
of mourning.  Everything about her was dark, except the whites of her
eyes and the enamel of her teeth.  The effect was complete.  Gray's Elegy
was not a more perfect composition.

Much as the Widow was pleased with the costume belonging to her
condition, she did not disguise from herself that under certain
circumstances she might be willing to change her name again.  Thus, for
instance, if a gentleman not too far gone in maturity, of dignified
exterior, with an ample fortune, and of unexceptionable character, should
happen to set his heart upon her, and the only way to make him happy was
to give up her weeds and go into those unbecoming colors again for his
sake,--why, she felt that it was in her nature to make the sacrifice.  By
a singular coincidence it happened that a gentleman was now living in
Rockland who united in himself all these advantages.  Who he was, the
sagacious reader may very probably have divined.  Just to see how it
looked, one day, having bolted her door, and drawn the curtains close,
and glanced under the sofa, and listened at the keyhole to be sure there
was nobody in the entry,--just to see how it looked, she had taken out an
envelope and written on the back of it Mrs. Manilla Veneer.  It made her
head swim and her knees tremble.  What if she should faint, or die, or
have a stroke of palsy, and they should break into the room and find that
name written!  How she caught it up and tore it into little shreds, and
then could not be easy until she had burned the small heap of pieces--

But these are things which every honorable reader will consider imparted
in strict confidence.

The Widow Rowens, though not of the mansion house set, was among the most
genteel of the two-story circle, and was in the habit of visiting some of
the great people.  In one of these visits she met a dashing young fellow
with an olive complexion at the house of a professional gentleman who had
married one of the white necks and pairs of fat arms from a distinguished
family before referred to. The professional gentleman himself was out,
but the lady introduced the olive-complexioned young man as Mr. Richard
Venner.

The Widow was particularly pleased with this accidental meeting.  Had
heard Mr. Venner's name frequently mentioned.  Hoped his uncle was well,
and his charming cousin,--was she as original as ever?  Had often admired
that charming creature he rode: we had had some fine horses.  Had never
got over her taste for riding, but could find nobody that liked a good
long gallop since--well--she could n't help wishing she was alongside of
him, the other day, when she saw him dashing by, just at twilight.

The Widow paused; lifted a flimsy handkerchief with a very deep black
border so as to play the jet bracelet; pushed the tip of her slender foot
beyond the lowest of her black flounces; looked up; looked down; looked
at Mr. Richard, the very picture of artless simplicity,--as represented
in well-played genteel comedy.

"A good bit of stuff," Dick said to himself, "and something of it left
yet; caramba!"  The Major had not studied points for nothing, and the
Widow was one of the right sort.  The young man had been a little
restless of late, and was willing to vary his routine by picking up an
acquaintance here and there.  So he took the Widow's hint.  He should
like to have a scamper of half a dozen miles with her some fine morning.

The Widow was infinitely obliged; was not sure that she could find any
horse in the village to suit her; but it was so kind in him! Would he not
call at Hyacinth Cottage, and let her thank him again there?

Thus began an acquaintance which the Widow made the most of, and on the
strength of which she determined to give a tea-party and invite a number
of persons of whom we know something already.  She took a half-sheet of
note-paper and made out her list as carefully as a country "merchant's
clerk" adds up two and threepence (New-England nomenclature) and twelve
and a half cents, figure by figure, and fraction by fraction, before he
can be sure they will make half a dollar, without cheating somebody.
After much consideration the list reduced itself to the following names:
Mr. Richard Venner and Mrs. Blanche Creamer, the lady at whose house she
had met him,--mansion-house breed,--but will come,--soft on Dick; Dudley
Venner,--take care of him herself; Elsie,--Dick will see to her,--won't
it fidget the Creamer woman to see him round her? the old Doctor,--he 's
always handy; and there's that young master there, up at the
school,--know him well enough to ask him,--oh, yes, he'll come.  One,
two, three, four, five, six,--seven; not room enough, without the leaf in
the table; one place empty, if the leaf's in.  Let's see,--Helen Darley,
--she 'll do well enough to fill it up,--why, yes, just the thing,
--light brown hair, blue eyes,--won't my pattern show off well against
her?  Put her down,--she 's worth her tea and toast ten times over,
--nobody knows what a "thunder-and-lightning woman," as poor Major used
to have it, is, till she gets alongside of one of those old-maidish
girls, with hair the color of brown sugar, and eyes like the blue of a
teacup.

The Widow smiled with a feeling of triumph at having overcome her
difficulties and arranged her party,--arose and stood before her glass,
three-quarters front, one-quarter profile, so as to show the whites of
the eyes and the down of the upper lip.  "Splendid!" said the Widow--and
to tell the truth, she was not far out of the way, and with Helen Darley
as a foil anybody would know she must be foudroyant and pyramidal,--if
these French adjectives may be naturalized for this one particular
exigency.

So the Widow sent out her notes.  The black grief which had filled her
heart and had overflowed in surges of crape around her person had left a
deposit half an inch wide at the margin of her note-paper. Her seal was a
small youth with an inverted torch, the same on which Mrs. Blanche
Creamer made her spiteful remark, that she expected to see that boy of
the Widow's standing on his head yet; meaning, as Dick supposed, that she
would get the torch right-side up as soon as she had a chance.  That was
after Dick had made the Widow's acquaintance, and Mrs. Creamer had got it
into her foolish head that she would marry that young fellow, if she
could catch him.  How could he ever come to fancy such a quadroon-looking
thing as that, she should like to know?

It is easy enough to ask seven people to a party; but whether they will
come or not is an open question, as it was in the case of the spirits of
the vasty deep.  If the note issues from a three-story mansion-house, and
goes to two-story acquaintances, they will all be in an excellent state
of health, and have much pleasure in accepting this very polite
invitation.  If the note is from the lady of a two-story family to
three-story ones, the former highly respectable person will very probably
find that an endemic complaint is prevalent, not represented in the
weekly bills of mortality, which occasions numerous regrets in the bosoms
of eminently desirable parties that they cannot have the pleasure of
and-so-forthing.

In this case there was room for doubt,--mainly as to whether Elsie would
take a fancy to come or not.  If she should come, her father would
certainly be with her.  Dick had promised, and thought he could bring
Elsie.  Of course the young schoolmaster will come, and that poor
tired-out looking Helen, if only to get out of sight of those horrid
Peckham wretches.  They don't get such invitations every day. The others
she felt sure of,--all but the old Doctor,--he might have some horrid
patient or other to visit; tell him Elsie Venner's going to be there,--he
always likes to have an eye on her, they say,--oh, he'd come fast enough,
without any more coaxing.

She wanted the Doctor, particularly.  It was odd, but she was afraid of
Elsie.  She felt as if she should be safe enough, if the old Doctor were
there to see to the girl; and then she should have leisure to devote
herself more freely to the young lady's father, for whom all her
sympathies were in a state of lively excitement.

It was a long time since the Widow had seen so many persons round her
table as she had now invited.  Better have the plates set and see how
they will fill it up with the leaf in.--A little too scattering with only
eight plates set: if she could find two more people, now, that would
bring the chairs a little closer,--snug, you know,--which makes the
company sociable.  The Widow thought over her acquaintances.  Why how
stupid! there was her good minister, the same who had married her, and
might--might--bury her for aught she anew, and his granddaughter staying
with him,--nice little girl, pretty, and not old enough to be
dangerous;--for the Widow had no notion of making a tea-party and asking
people to it that would be like to stand between her and any little
project she might happen to have on anybody's heart,--not she!  It was
all right now; Blanche was married and so forth; Letty was a child; Elsie
was his daughter; Helen Darley was a nice, worthy drudge,--poor
thing!--faded, faded,--colors wouldn't wash, just what she wanted to show
off against.  Now, if the Dudley mansion-house people would only
come,--that was the great point.

"Here's a note for us, Elsie," said her father, as they sat round the
breakfast-table.  "Mrs. Rowens wants us all to come to tea."

It was one of "Elsie's days," as old Sophy called them.  The light in her
eyes was still, but very bright.  She looked up so full of perverse and
wilful impulses, that Dick knew he could make her go with him and her
father.  He had his own motives for bringing her to this
determination,--and his own way of setting about it.

"I don't want to go," he said.  "What do you say, uncle?"

"To tell the truth, Richard, I don't mach fancy the Major's widow.  I
don't like to see her weeds flowering out quite so strong.  I suppose you
don't care about going, Elsie?"

Elsie looked up in her father's face with an expression which he knew but
too well.  She was just in the state which the plain sort of people call
"contrary," when they have to deal with it in animals. She would insist
on going to that tea-party; he knew it just as well before she spoke as
after she had spoken.  If Dick had said he wanted to go and her father
had seconded his wishes, she would have insisted on staying at home.  It
was no great matter, her father said to himself, after all; very likely
it would amuse her; the Widow was a lively woman enough,--perhaps a
little comme il ne faut pas socially, compared with the Thorntons and
some other families; but what did he care for these petty village
distinctions?

Elsie spoke.

"I mean to go.  You must go with me, Dudley.  You may do as you like,
Dick."

That settled the Dudley-mansion business, of course.  They all three
accepted, as fortunately did all the others who had been invited.

Hyacinth Cottage was a pretty place enough, a little too much choked
round with bushes, and too much overrun with climbing-roses, which, in
the season of slugs and rose-bugs, were apt to show so brown about the
leaves and so coleopterous about the flowers, that it might be questioned
whether their buds and blossoms made up for these unpleasant animal
combinations,--especially as the smell of whale-oil soap was very
commonly in the ascendant over that of the roses.  It had its patch of
grass called "the lawn," and its glazed closet known as "the
conservatory," according to that system of harmless fictions
characteristic of the rural imagination and shown in the names applied to
many familiar objects.  The interior of the cottage was more tasteful and
ambitious than that of the ordinary two-story dwellings.  In place of the
prevailing hair-cloth covered furniture, the visitor had the satisfaction
of seating himself upon a chair covered with some of the Widow's
embroidery, or a sofa luxurious with soft caressing plush.  The sporting
tastes of the late Major showed in various prints on the wall: Herring's
"Plenipotentiary," the "red bullock" of the '34 Derby; "Cadland" and "The
Colonel;" "Crucifix;" "West-Australian," fastest of modern racers; and
among native celebrities, ugly, game old "Boston," with his straight neck
and ragged hips; and gray "Lady Suffolk," queen, in her day, not of the
turf but of the track, "extending" herself till she measured a rod, more
or less, skimming along within a yard of the ground, her legs opening and
shutting under her with a snap, like the four blades of a compound
jack-knife.

These pictures were much more refreshing than those dreary fancy
death-bed scenes, common in two-story country-houses, in which Washington
and other distinguished personages are represented as obligingly devoting
their last moments to taking a prominent part in a tableau, in which
weeping relatives, attached servants, professional assistants, and
celebrated personages who might by a stretch of imagination be supposed
present, are grouped in the most approved style of arrangement about the
chief actor's pillow.

A single glazed bookcase held the family library, which was hidden from
vulgar eyes by green silk curtains behind the glass.  It would have been
instructive to get a look at it, as it always is to peep into one's
neighbor's book-shelves.  From other sources and opportunities a partial
idea of it has been obtained.  The Widow had inherited some books from
her mother, who was something of a reader: Young's "Night-Thoughts;" "The
Preceptor;" "The Task, a Poem," by William Cowper; Hervey's
"Meditations;" "Alonzo and Melissa;" "Buccaneers of America;" "The
Triumphs of Temper;" "La Belle Assemblee;" Thomson's "Seasons;" and a few
others.  The Major had brought in "Tom Jones" and "Peregrine Pickle;"
various works by Mr. Pierce Egan; "Boxiana," "The Racing Calendar;" and a
"Book of Lively Songs and Jests."  The Widow had added the Poems of Lord
Byron and T. Moore; "Eugene Aram;" "The Tower of London," by Harrison
Ainsworth; some of Scott's Novels; "The Pickwick Papers;" a volume of
Plays, by W. Shakespeare; "Proverbial Philosophy;" "Pilgrim's Progress;"
"The Whole Duty of Man" (a present when she was married); with two
celebrated religious works, one by William Law and the other by Philip
Doddridge, which were sent her after her husband's death, and which she
had tried to read, but found that they did not agree with her.  Of course
the bookcase held a few school manuals and compendiums, and one of Mr.
Webster's Dictionaries.  But the gilt-edged Bible always lay on the
centre-table, next to the magazine with the fashion-plates and the
scrap-book with pictures from old annuals and illustrated papers.

The reader need not apprehend the recital, at full length, of such
formidable preparations for the Widow's tea-party as were required in the
case of Colonel Sprowle's Social Entertainment.  A tea-party, even in the
country, is a comparatively simple and economical piece of business.  As
soon as the Widow found that all her company were coming, she set to
work, with the aid of her "smart" maid-servant and a daughter of her own,
who was beginning to stretch and spread at a fearful rate, but whom she
treated as a small child, to make the necessary preparations.  The silver
had to be rubbed; also the grand plated urn,--her mother's before
hers,--style of the Empire,--looking as if it might have been made to
hold the Major's ashes.  Then came the making and baking of cake and
gingerbread, the smell whereof reached even as far as the sidewalk in
front of the cottage, so that small boys returning from school snuffed it
in the breeze, and discoursed with each other on its suggestions; so that
the Widow Leech, who happened to pass, remembered she had n't called on
Marilly Raowens for a consid'ble spell, and turned in at the gate and
rang three times with long intervals,--but all in vain, the inside Widow
having "spotted" the outside one through the blinds, and whispered to her
aides-de-camp to let the old thing ring away till she pulled the bell out
by the roots, but not to stir to open the door.

Widow Rowens was what they called a real smart, capable woman, not very
great on books, perhaps, but knew what was what and who was who as well
as another,--knew how to make the little cottage look pretty, how to set
out a tea-table, and, what a good many women never can find out, knew her
own style and "got herself up tip-top," as our young friend Master
Geordie, Colonel Sprowle's heir-apparent, remarked to his friend from one
of the fresh-water colleges.  Flowers were abundant now, and she had
dressed her rooms tastefully with them.  The centre-table had two or
three gilt-edged books lying carelessly about on it, and some prints and
a stereoscope with stereographs to match, chiefly groups of picnics,
weddings, etc., in which the same somewhat fatigued looking ladies of
fashion and brides received the attentions of the same unpleasant-looking
young men, easily identified under their different disguises, consisting
of fashionable raiment such as gentlemen are supposed to wear habitually.
With these, however, were some pretty English scenes,--pretty except for
the old fellow with the hanging under-lip who infests every one of that
interesting series; and a statue or two, especially that famous one
commonly called the Lahcoon, so as to rhyme with moon and spoon, and
representing an old man with his two sons in the embraces of two
monstrous serpents.

There is no denying that it was a very dashing achievement of the Widow's
to bring together so considerable a number of desirable guests.  She felt
proud of her feat; but as to the triumph of getting Dudley Venner to come
out for a visit to Hyacinth Cottage, she was surprised and almost
frightened at her own success.  So much might depend on the impressions
of that evening!

The next thing was to be sure that everybody should be in the right place
at the tea-table, and this the Widow thought she could manage by a few
words to the older guests and a little shuffling about and shifting when
they got to the table.  To settle everything the Widow made out a
diagram, which the reader should have a chance of inspecting in an
authentic copy, if these pages were allowed under any circumstances to be
the vehicle of illustrations.  If, however, he or she really wishes to
see the way the pieces stood as they were placed at the beginning of the
game, (the Widow's gambit,) he or she had better at once take a sheet of
paper, draw an oval, and arrange the characters according to the
following schedule.

At the head of the table, the Hostess, Widow Marilla Rowens. Opposite
her, at the other end, Rev.  Dr. Honeywood.  At the right of the Hostess,
Dudley Veneer, next him Helen Darley, next her Dr. Kittredge, next him
Mrs. Blanche Creamer, then the Reverend Doctor. At the left of the
Hostess, Bernard Langdon, next him Letty Forrester, next Letty Mr.
Richard Veneer, next him Elsie, and so to the Reverend Doctor again.

The company came together a little before the early hour at which it was
customary to take tea in Rockland.  The Widow knew everybody, of course:
who was there in Rockland she did not know?  But some of them had to be
introduced: Mr. Richard Veneer to Mr. Bernard, Mr. Bernard to Miss Letty,
Dudley Veneer to Miss Helen Darley, and so on.  The two young men looked
each other straight in the eyes, both full of youthful life, but one of
frank and fearless aspect, the other with a dangerous feline beauty alien
to the New England half of his blood.

The guests talked, turned over the prints, looked at the flowers, opened
the "Proverbial Philosophy" with gilt edges, and the volume of Plays by
W.  Shakespeare, examined the horse-pictures on the walls, and so passed
away the time until tea was announced, when they paired off for the room
where it was in readiness.  The Widow had managed it well; everything was
just as she wanted it.  Dudley Veneer was between herself and the poor
tired-looking schoolmistress with her faded colors.  Blanche Creamer, a
lax, tumble-to-pieces, Greuze-ish looking blonde, whom the Widow hated
because the men took to her, was purgatoried between the two old Doctors,
and could see all the looks that passed between Dick Venner and his
cousin.  The young schoolmaster could talk to Miss Letty: it was his
business to know how to talk to schoolgirls.  Dick would amuse himself
with his cousin Elsie.  The old Doctors only wanted to be well fed and
they would do well enough.

It would be very pleasant to describe the tea-table; but in reality, it
did not pretend to offer a plethoric banquet to the guests.  The Widow
had not visited the mansion-houses for nothing, and she had learned there
that an overloaded tea-table may do well enough for farm-hands when they
come in at evening from their work and sit down unwashed in their
shirtsleeves, but that for decently bred people such an insult to the
memory of a dinner not yet half-assimilated is wholly inadmissible.
Everything was delicate, and almost everything of fair complexion: white
bread and biscuits, frosted and sponge cake, cream, honey, straw-colored
butter; only a shadow here and there, where the fire had crisped and
browned the surfaces of a stack of dry toast, or where a preserve had
brought away some of the red sunshine of the last year's summer.  The
Widow shall have the credit of her well-ordered tea-table, also of her
bountiful cream-pitchers; for it is well known that city-people find
cream a very scarce luxury in a good many country-houses of more
pretensions than Hyacinth Cottage.  There are no better maims for ladies
who give tea-parties than these:

Cream is thicker than water. Large heart never loved little cream pot.

There is a common feeling in genteel families that the third meal of the
day is not so essential a part of the daily bread as to require any
especial acknowledgment to the Providence which bestows it.  Very devout
people, who would never sit down to a breakfast or a dinner without the
grace before meat which honors the Giver of it, feel as if they thanked
Heaven enough for their tea and toast by partaking of them cheerfully
without audible petition or ascription.  But the Widow was not exactly
mansion-house-bred, and so thought it necessary to give the Reverend
Doctor a peculiar look which he understood at once as inviting his
professional services.  He, therefore, uttered a few simple words of
gratitude, very quietly,--much to the satisfaction of some of the guests,
who had expected one of those elaborate effusions, with rolling up of the
eyes and rhetorical accents, so frequent with eloquent divines when they
address their Maker in genteel company.

Everybody began talking with the person sitting next at hand.  Mr.
Bernard naturally enough turned his attention first to the Widow; but
somehow or other the right side of the Widow seemed to be more wide awake
than the left side, next him, and he resigned her to the courtesies of
Mr. Dudley Venner, directing himself, not very unwillingly, to the young
girl next him on the other side.  Miss Letty Forrester, the granddaughter
of the Reverend Doctor, was city-bred, as anybody might see, and
city-dressed, as any woman would know at sight; a man might only feel the
general effect of clear, well-matched colors, of harmonious proportions,
of the cut which makes everything cling like a bather's sleeve where a
natural outline is to be kept, and ruffle itself up like the hackle of a
pitted fighting-cock where art has a right to luxuriate in silken
exuberance.  How this citybred and city-dressed girl came to be in
Rockland Mr. Bernard did not know, but he knew at any rate that she was
his next neighbor and entitled to his courtesies.  She was handsome, too,
when he came to look, very handsome when he came to look again,--endowed
with that city beauty which is like the beauty of wall-fruit, something
finer in certain respects than can be reared off the pavement.

The miserable routinists who keep repeating invidiously Cowper's

    "God made the country and man made the town,"

as if the town were a place to kill out the race in, do not know what
they are talking about.  Where could they raise such Saint-Michael pears,
such Saint-Germains, such Brown-Beurres, as we had until within a few
years growing within the walls of our old city-gardens? Is the dark and
damp cavern where a ragged beggar hides himself better than a
town-mansion which fronts the sunshine and backs on its own cool shadow,
with gas and water and all appliances to suit all needs?  God made the
cavern and man made the house!  What then?

There is no doubt that the pavement keeps a deal of mischief from coming
up out of the earth, and, with a dash off of it in summer, just to cool
the soles of the feet when it gets too hot, is the best place for many
constitutions, as some few practical people have already discovered.  And
just so these beauties that grow and ripen against the city-walls, these
young fellows with cheeks like peaches and young girls with cheeks like
nectarines, show that the most perfect forms of artificial life can do as
much for the human product as garden-culture for strawberries and
blackberries.

If Mr. Bernard had philosophized or prosed in this way, with so pretty,
nay, so lovely a neighbor as Miss Letty Forrester waiting for him to
speak to her, he would have to be dropped from this narrative as a person
unworthy of his good-fortune, and not deserving the kind reader's further
notice.  On the contrary, he no sooner set his eyes fairly on her than he
said to himself that she was charming, and that he wished she were one of
his scholars at the Institute.  So he began talking with her in an easy
way; for he knew something of young girls by this time, and, of course,
could adapt himself to a young lady who looked as if she might be not
more than fifteen or sixteen years old, and therefore could hardly be a
match in intellectual resources for the seventeen and eighteen year-old
first-class scholars of the Apollinean Institute.  But city-wall-fruit
ripens early, and he soon found that this girl's training had so
sharpened her wits and stored her memory, that he need not be at the
trouble to stoop painfully in order to come down to her level.

The beauty of good-breeding is that it adjusts itself to all relations
without effort, true to itself always however the manners of those around
it may change.  Self-respect and respect for others,--the sensitive
consciousness poises itself in these as the compass in the ship's
binnacle balances itself and maintains its true level within the two
concentric rings which suspend it on their pivots. This thorough-bred
school-girl quite enchanted Mr. Bernard.  He could not understand where
she got her style, her way of dress, her enunciation, her easy manners.
The minister was a most worthy gentleman, but this was not the Rockland
native-born manner; some new element had come in between the good, plain,
worthy man and this young girl, fit to be a Crown Prince's partner where
there were a thousand to choose from.

He looked across to Helen Darley, for he knew she would understand the
glance of admiration with which he called her attention to the young
beauty at his side; and Helen knew what a young girl could be, as
compared with what too many a one is, as well as anybody.

This poor, dear Helen of ours!  How admirable the contrast between her
and the Widow on the other side of Dudley Venner!  But, what was very
odd, that gentleman apparently thought the contrast was to the advantage
of this poor, dear Helen.  At any rate, instead of devoting himself
solely to the Widow, he happened to be just at that moment talking in a
very interested and, apparently, not uninteresting way to his right-hand
neighbor, who, on her part, never looked more charmingly,--as Mr. Bernard
could not help saying to himself,--but, to be sure, he had just been
looking at the young girl next him, so that his eyes were brimful of
beauty, and may have spilled some of it on the first comer: for you know
M. Becquerel has been showing us lately how everything is phosphorescent;
that it soaks itself with light in an instant's exposure, so that it is
wet with liquid sunbeams, or, if you will, tremulous with luminous
vibrations, when first plunged into the negative bath of darkness, and
betrays itself by the light which escapes from its surface.

Whatever were the reason, this poor, dear Helen never looked so sweetly.
Her plainly parted brown hair, her meek, blue eyes, her cheek just a
little tinged with color, the almost sad simplicity of her dress, and
that look he knew so well,--so full of cheerful patience, so sincere,
that he had trusted her from the first moment as the believers of the
larger half of Christendom trust the Blessed Virgin,--Mr. Bernard took
this all in at a glance, and felt as pleased as if it had been his own
sister Dorothea Elizabeth that he was looking at.  As for Dudley Veneer,
Mr. Bernard could not help being struck by the animated expression of his
countenance.  It certainly showed great kindness, on his part, to pay so
much attention to this quiet girl, when he had the thunder-and-lightning
Widow on the other side of him.

Mrs. Marilla Rowens did not know what to make of it.  She had made her
tea-party expressly for Mr. Dudley Veneer.  She had placed him just as
she wanted, between herself and a meek, delicate woman who dressed in
gray, wore a plain breastpin with hair in it, who taught a pack of girls
up there at the school, and looked as if she were born for a
teacher,--the very best foil that she could have chosen; and here was
this man, polite enough to herself, to be sure, but turning round to that
very undistinguished young person as if he rather preferred her
conversation of the two!

The truth was that Dudley Veneer and Helen Darley met as two travellers
might meet in the desert, wearied, both of them, with their long journey,
one having food, but no water, the other water, but no food.  Each saw
that the other had been in long conflict with some trial; for their
voices were low and tender, as patiently borne sorrow and humbly uttered
prayers make every human voice.  Through these tones, more than by what
they said, they came into natural sympathetic relations with each other.
Nothing could be more unstudied.  As for Dudley Venner, no beauty in all
the world could have so soothed and magnetized him as the very repose and
subdued gentleness which the Widow had thought would make the best
possible background for her own more salient and effective attractions.
No doubt, Helen, on her side, was almost too readily pleased with the
confidence this new acquaintance she was making seemed to show her from
the very first.  She knew so few men of any condition!  Mr. Silas
Peckham: he was her employer, and she ought to think of him as well as
she could; but every time she thought of him it was with a shiver of
disgust.  Mr. Bernard Langdon: a noble young man, a true friend, like a
brother to her,--God bless him, and send him some young heart as fresh as
his own!  But this gentleman produced a new impression upon her, quite
different from any to which she was accustomed.  His rich, low tones had
the strangest significance to her; she felt sure he must have lived
through long experiences, sorrowful like her own.  Elsie's father!  She
looked into his dark eyes, as she listened to him, to see if they had any
glimmer of that peculiar light, diamond-bright, but cold and still, which
she knew so well in Elsie's.  Anything but that!  Never was there more
tenderness, it seemed to her, than in the whole look and expression of
Elsie's father.  She must have been a great trial to him; yet his face
was that of one who had been saddened, not soured, by his discipline.
Knowing what Elsie must be to him, how hard she must make any parent's
life, Helen could not but be struck with the interest Mr. Dudley Venner
showed in her as his daughter's instructress.  He was too kind to her;
again and again she meekly turned from him, so as to leave him free to
talk to the showy lady at his other side, who was looking all the while

                         "like the night
          Of cloudless realms and starry skies;"

but still Mr. Dudley Venner, after a few courteous words, came back to
the blue eyes and brown hair; still he kept his look fixed upon her, and
his tones grew sweeter and lower as he became more interested in talk,
until this poor, dear Helen, what with surprise, and the bashfulness
natural to one who had seen little of the gay world, and the stirring of
deep, confused sympathies with this suffering father, whose heart seemed
so full of kindness, felt her cheeks glowing with unwonted flame, and
betrayed the pleasing trouble of her situation by looking so sweetly as
to arrest Mr. Bernard's eye for a moment, when he looked away from the
young beauty sitting next him.

Elsie meantime had been silent, with that singular, still, watchful look
which those who knew her well had learned to fear.  Her head just a
little inclined on one side, perfectly motionless for whole minutes, her
eyes seeming to, grow small and bright, as always when she was under her
evil influence, she was looking obliquely at the young girl on the other
side of her cousin Dick and next to Bernard Langdon.  As for Dick
himself, she seemed to be paying very little attention to him.  Sometimes
her eyes would wander off to Mr. Bernard, and their expression, as old
Dr. Kittredge, who watched her for a while pretty keenly, noticed, would
change perceptibly.  One would have said that she looked with a kind of
dull hatred at the girl, but with a half-relenting reproachful anger at
Mr. Bernard.

Miss Letty Forrester, at whom Elsie had been looking from time to time in
this fixed way, was conscious meanwhile of some unusual influence.  First
it was a feeling of constraint,--then, as it were, a diminished power
over the muscles, as if an invisible elastic cobweb were spinning round
her,--then a tendency to turn away from Mr. Bernard, who was making
himself very agreeable, and look straight into those eyes which would not
leave her, and which seemed to be drawing her towards them, while at the
same time they chilled the blood in all her veins.

Mr. Bernard saw this influence coming over her.  All at once he noticed
that she sighed, and that some little points of moisture began to glisten
on her forehead.  But she did not grow pale perceptibly; she had no
involuntary or hysteric movements; she still listened to him and smiled
naturally enough.  Perhaps she was only nervous at being stared at.  At
any rate, she was coming under some unpleasant influence or other, and
Mr. Bernard had seen enough of the strange impression Elsie sometimes
produced to wish this young girl to be relieved from it, whatever it was.
He turned toward Elsie and looked at her in such a way as to draw her
eyes upon him.  Then he looked steadily and calmly into them.  It was a
great effort, for some perfectly inexplicable reason.  At one instant he
thought he could not sit where he was; he must go and speak to Elsie.
Then he wanted to take his eyes away from hers; there was something
intolerable in the light that came from them.  But he was determined to
look her down, and he believed he could do it, for he had seen her
countenance change more than once when he had caught her gaze steadily
fixed on him.  All this took not minutes, but seconds. Presently she
changed color slightly,--lifted her head, which was inclined a little to
one side,--shut and opened her eyes two or three times, as if they had
been pained or wearied,--and turned away baffled, and shamed, as it would
seem, and shorn for the time of her singular and formidable or at least
evil-natured power of swaying the impulses of those around her.

It takes too long to describe these scenes where a good deal of life is
concentrated into a few silent seconds.  Mr. Richard Veneer had sat
quietly through it all, although this short pantomime had taken place
literally before his face.  He saw what was going on well enough, and
understood it all perfectly well.  Of course the schoolmaster had been
trying to make Elsie jealous, and had succeeded.  The little schoolgirl
was a decoy-duck,--that was all. Estates like the Dudley property were
not to be had every day, and no doubt the Yankee usher was willing to
take some pains to make sure of Elsie.  Does n't Elsie look savage?  Dick
involuntarily moved his chair a little away from her, and thought he felt
a pricking in the small white scars on his wrist.  A dare-devil fellow,
but somehow or other this girl had taken strange hold of his imagination,
and he often swore to himself, that, when he married her, he would carry
a loaded revolver with him to his bridal chamber.

Mrs. Blanche Creamer raged inwardly at first to find herself between the
two old gentlemen of the party.  It very soon gave her great comfort,
however, to see that Marilla, Rowens had just missed it in her
calculations, and she chuckled immensely to find Dudley Veneer devoting
himself chiefly to Helen Darley.  If the Rowens woman should hook Dudley,
she felt as if she should gnaw all her nails off for spite.  To think of
seeing her barouching about Rockland behind a pair of long-tailed bays
and a coachman with a band on his hat, while she, Blanche Creamer, was
driving herself about in a one-horse "carriage"!  Recovering her spirits
by degrees, she began playing her surfaces off at the two old Doctors,
just by way of practice.  First she heaved up a glaring white shoulder,
the right one, so that the Reverend Doctor should be stunned by it, if
such a thing might be. The Reverend Doctor was human, as the Apostle was
not ashamed to confess himself.  Half-devoutly and half-mischievously he
repeated inwardly, "Resist the Devil and he will flee from you."  As the
Reverend Doctor did not show any lively susceptibility, she thought she
would try the left shoulder on old Dr. Kittredge.  That worthy and
experienced student of science was not at all displeased with the
manoeuvre, and lifted his head so as to command the exhibition through
his glasses.  "Blanche is good for half a dozen years or so, if she is
careful," the Doctor said to himself, "and then she must take to her
prayer-book."  After this spasmodic failure of Mrs. Blanche Creamer's to
stir up the old Doctors, she returned again to the pleasing task of
watching the Widow in her evident discomfiture. But dark as the Widow
looked in her half-concealed pet, she was but as a pale shadow, compared
to Elsie in her silent concentration of shame and anger.

"Well, there is one good thing," said Mrs. Blanche Creamer; "Dick doesn't
get much out of that cousin of his this evening!  Does n't he look
handsome, though?"

So Mrs. Blanche, being now a good deal taken up with her observations of
those friends of hers and ours, began to be rather careless of her two
old Doctors, who naturally enough fell into conversation with each other
across the white surfaces of that lady, perhaps not very politely, but,
under the, circumstances, almost as a matter of necessity.

When a minister and a doctor get talking together, they always have a
great deal to say; and so it happened that the company left the table
just as the two Doctors were beginning to get at each other's ideas about
various interesting matters.  If we follow them into the other parlor, we
can, perhaps, pick up something of their conversation.




CHAPTER XXII.

WHY DOCTORS DIFFER.

The company rearranged itself with some changes after leaving the
tea-table.  Dudley Veneer was very polite to the Widow; but that lady
having been called off for a few moments for some domestic arrangement,
he slid back to the side of Helen Darley, his daughter's faithful
teacher.  Elsie had got away by herself, and was taken up in studying the
stereoscopic Laocoon.  Dick, being thus set free, had been seized upon by
Mrs. Blanche Creamer, who had diffused herself over three-quarters of a
sofa and beckoned him to the remaining fourth.  Mr. Bernard and Miss
Letty were having a snug fete-'a-fete in the recess of a bay-window.  The
two Doctors had taken two arm-chairs and sat squared off against each
other.  Their conversation is perhaps as well worth reporting as that of
the rest of the company, and, as it was carried on in a louder tone, was
of course more easy to gather and put on record.

It was a curious sight enough to see those two representatives of two
great professions brought face to face to talk over the subjects they had
been looking at all their lives from such different points of view.  Both
were old; old enough to have been moulded by their habits of thought and
life; old enough to have all their beliefs "fretted in," as vintners
say,--thoroughly worked up with their characters. Each of them looked his
calling.  The Reverend Doctor had lived a good deal among books in his
study; the Doctor, as we will call the medical gentleman, had been riding
about the country for between thirty and forty years.  His face looked
tough and weather-worn; while the Reverend Doctor's, hearty as it
appeared, was of finer texture.  The Doctor's was the graver of the two;
there was something of grimness about it, partly owing to the
northeasters he had faced for so many years, partly to long companionship
with that stern personage who never deals in sentiment or pleasantry.
His speech was apt to be brief and peremptory; it was a way he had got by
ordering patients; but he could discourse somewhat, on occasion, as the
reader may find out.  The Reverend Doctor had an open, smiling
expression, a cheery voice, a hearty laugh, and a cordial way with him
which some thought too lively for his cloth, but which children, who are
good judges of such matters, delighted in, so that he was the favorite of
all the little rogues about town.  But he had the clerical art of
sobering down in a moment, when asked to say grace while somebody was in
the middle of some particularly funny story; and though his voice was so
cheery in common talk, in the pulpit, like almost all preachers, he had a
wholly different and peculiar way of speaking, supposed to be more
acceptable to the Creator than the natural manner.  In point of fact,
most of our anti-papal and anti-prelatical clergymen do really intone
their prayers, without suspecting in the least that they have fallen into
such a Romish practice.

This is the way the conversation between the Doctor of Divinity and the
Doctor of Medicine was going on at the point where these notes take it
up.

"Obi tres medici, duo athei, you know, Doctor.  Your profession has
always had the credit of being lax in doctrine,--though pretty stringent
in practice, ha! ha!"

"Some priest said that," the Doctor answered, dryly.  "They always talked
Latin when they had a bigger lie than common to get rid of."

"Good!"  said the Reverend Doctor; "I'm afraid they would lie a little
sometimes.  But isn't there some truth in it, Doctor?  Don't you think
your profession is apt to see 'Nature' in the place of the God of
Nature,--to lose sight of the great First Cause in their daily study of
secondary causes?"

"I've thought about that," the Doctor answered, "and I've talked about it
and read about it, and I've come to the conclusion that nobody believes
in God and trusts in God quite so much as the doctors; only it is n't
just the sort of Deity that some of your profession have wanted them to
take up with.  There was a student of mine wrote a dissertation on the
Natural Theology of Health and Disease, and took that old lying proverb
for his motto.  He knew a good deal more about books than ever I did, and
had studied in other countries.  I'll tell you what he said about it.  He
said the old Heathen Doctor, Galen, praised God for his handiwork in the
human body, just as if he had been a Christian, or the Psalmist himself.
He said they had this sentence set up in large letters in the great
lecture-room in Paris where he attended: I dressed his wound and God
healed him.  That was an old surgeon's saying.  And he gave a long list
of doctors who were not only Christians, but famous ones.  I grant you,
though, ministers and doctors are very apt to see differently in
spiritual matters."

"That's it," said the Reverend Doctor; "you are apt to see 'Nature' where
we see God, and appeal to 'Science' where we are contented with
Revelation."

"We don't separate God and Nature, perhaps, as you do," the Doctor
answered.  "When we say that God is omnipresent and omnipotent and
omniscient, we are a little more apt to mean it than your folks are. We
think, when a wound heals, that God's presence and power and knowledge
are there, healing it, just as that old surgeon did.  We think a good
many theologians, working among their books, don't see the facts of the
world they live in.  When we tell 'em of these facts, they are apt to
call us materialists and atheists and infidels, and all that.  We can't
help seeing the facts, and we don't think it's wicked to mention 'em."

"Do tell me," the Reverend Doctor said, "some of these facts we are in
the habit of overlooking, and which your profession thinks it can see and
understand."

"That's very easy," the Doctor replied.  "For instance: you don't
understand or don't allow for idiosyncrasies as we learn to.  We know
that food and physic act differently with different people; but you think
the same kind of truth is going to suit, or ought to suit, all minds.  We
don't fight with a patient because he can't take magnesia or opium; but
you are all the time quarrelling over your beliefs, as if belief did not
depend very much on race and constitution, to say nothing of early
training."

"Do you mean to say that every man is not absolutely free to choose his
beliefs?"

"The men you write about in your studies are, but not the men we see in
the real world.  There is some apparently congenital defect in the
Indians, for instance, that keeps them from choosing civilization and
Christianity.  So with the Gypsies, very likely.  Everybody knows that
Catholicism or Protestantism is a good deal a matter of race.
Constitution has more to do with belief than people think for.  I went to
a Universalist church, when I was in the city one day, to hear a famous
man whom all the world knows, and I never saw such pews-full of broad
shoulders and florid faces, and substantial, wholesome-looking persons,
male and female, in all my life.  Why, it was astonishing.  Either their
creed made them healthy, or they chose it because they were healthy.
Your folks have never got the hang of human nature."

"I am afraid this would be considered a degrading and dangerous view of
human beliefs and responsibility for them," the Reverend Doctor replied.
"Prove to a man that his will is governed by something outside of
himself, and you have lost all hold on his moral and religious nature.
There is nothing bad men want to believe so much as that they are
governed by necessity.  Now that which is at once degrading and dangerous
cannot be true."

"No doubt," the Doctor replied, "all large views of mankind limit our
estimate of the absolute freedom of the will.  But I don't think it
degrades or endangers us, for this reason, that, while it makes us
charitable to the rest of mankind, our own sense of freedom, whatever it
is, is never affected by argument.  Conscience won't be reasoned with.
We feel that we can practically do this of that, and if we choose the
wrong, we know we are responsible; but observation teaches us that this
or that other race or individual has not the same practical freedom of
choice.  I don't see how we can avoid this conclusion in the instance of
the American Indians.  The science of Ethnology has upset a good many
theoretical notions about human nature."

"Science!"  said the Reverend Doctor, "science! that was a word the
Apostle Paul did not seem to think much of, if we may judge by the
Epistle to Timothy: 'Oppositions of science falsely so called.' I own
that I am jealous of that word and the pretensions that go with it.
Science has seemed to me to be very often only the handmaid of
skepticism."

"Doctor!" the physician said, emphatically, "science is knowledge.
Nothing that is not known properly belongs to science.  Whenever
knowledge obliges us to doubt, we are always safe in doubting.
Astronomers foretell eclipses, say how long comets are to stay with us,
point out where a new planet is to be found.  We see they know what they
assert, and the poor old Roman Catholic Church has at last to knock
under.  So Geology proves a certain succession of events, and the best
Christian in the world must make the earth's history square with it.
Besides, I don't think you remember what great revelations of himself the
Creator has made in the minds of the men who have built up science.  You
seem to me to hold his human masterpieces very cheap.  Don't you think
the 'inspiration of the Almighty' gave Newton and Cuvier
'understanding'?"

The Reverend Doctor was not arguing for victory.  In fact, what he wanted
was to call out the opinions of the old physician by a show of
opposition, being already predisposed to agree with many of them.  He was
rather trying the common arguments, as one tries tricks of fence merely
to learn the way of parrying.  But just here he saw a tempting opening,
and could not resist giving a home-thrust.

"Yes; but you surely would not consider it inspiration of the same kind
as that of the writers of the Old Testament?"

That cornered the Doctor, and he paused a moment before he replied. Then
he raised his head, so as to command the Reverend Doctor's face through
his spectacles, and said,

"I did not say that.  You are clear, I suppose, that the Omniscient spoke
through Solomon, but that Shakespeare wrote without his help?"

The Reverend Doctor looked very grave.  It was a bold, blunt way of
putting the question.  He turned it aside with the remark, that
Shakespeare seemed to him at times to come as near inspiration as any
human being not included among the sacred writers.

"Doctor," the physician began, as from a sudden suggestion, "you won't
quarrel with me, if I tell you some of my real thoughts, will you?"

"Say on, my dear Sir, say on," the minister answered, with his most
genial smile; "your real thoughts are just what I want to get at.  A
man's real thoughts are a great rarity.  If I don't agree with you, I
shall like to hear you."

The Doctor began; and in order to give his thoughts more connectedly, we
will omit the conversational breaks, the questions and comments of the
clergyman, and all accidental interruptions.

"When the old ecclesiastics said that where there were three doctors
there were two atheists, they lied, of course.  They called everybody who
differed from them atheists, until they found out that not believing in
God was n't nearly so ugly a crime as not believing in some particular
dogma; then they called them heretics, until so many good people had been
burned under that name that it began to smell too strong of roasting
flesh,--and after that infidels, which properly means people without
faith, of whom there are not a great many in any place or time.  But
then, of course, there was some reason why doctors shouldn't think about
religion exactly as ministers did, or they never would have made that
proverb.  It 's very likely that something of the same kind is true now;
whether it is so or not, I am going to tell you the reasons why it would
not be strange, if doctors should take rather different views from
clergymen about some matters of belief.  I don't, of course, mean all
doctors nor all clergymen.  Some doctors go as far as any old New England
divine, and some clergymen agree very well with the doctors that think
least according to rule.

"To begin with their ideas of the Creator himself.  They always see him
trying to help his creatures out of their troubles.  A man no sooner gets
a cut, than the Great Physician, whose agency we often call Nature, goes
to work, first to stop the blood, and then to heal the wound, and then to
make the scar as small as possible.  If a man's pain exceeds a certain
amount, he faints, and so gets relief. If it lasts too long, habit comes
in to make it tolerable.  If it is altogether too bad, he dies.  That is
the best thing to be done under the circumstances.  So you see, the
doctor is constantly in presence of a benevolent agency working against a
settled order of things, of which pain and disease are the accidents, so
to speak.  Well, no doubt they find it harder than clergymen to believe
that there can be any world or state from which this benevolent agency is
wholly excluded.  This may be very wrong; but it is not unnatural.

"They can hardly conceive of a permanent state of being in which cuts
would never try to heal, nor habit render suffering endurable.  This is
one effect of their training.

"Then, again, their attention is very much called to human limitations.
Ministers work out the machinery of responsibility in an abstract kind of
way; they have a sort of algebra of human nature, in which friction and
strength (or weakness) of material are left out.  You see, a doctor is in
the way of studying children from the moment of birth upwards.  For the
first year or so he sees that they are just as much pupils of their Maker
as the young of any other animals.  Well, their Maker trains them to pure
selfishness.  Why? In order that they may be sure to take care of
themselves.  So you see, when a child comes to be, we will say a year and
a day old, and makes his first choice between right and wrong, he is at a
disadvantage; for he, has that vis a tergo, as we doctors call it, that
force from behind, of a whole year's life of selfishness, for which he is
no more to blame than a calf is to blame for having lived in the same
way, purely to gratify his natural appetites.  Then we see that baby grow
up to a child, and, if he is fat and stout and red and lively, we expect
to find him troublesome and noisy, and, perhaps, sometimes disobedient
more or less; that's the way each new generation breaks its egg-shell;
but if he is very weak and thin, and is one of the kind that may be
expected to die early, he will very likely sit in the house all day and
read good books about other little sharp-faced children just like
himself, who died early, having always been perfectly indifferent to all
the out-door amusements of the wicked little red-cheeked children.

"Some of the little folks we watch grow up to be young women, and
occasionally one of them gets nervous, what we call hysterical, and then
that girl will begin to play all sorts of pranks,--to lie and cheat,
perhaps, in the most unaccountable way, so that she might seem to a
minister a good example of total depravity.  We don't see her in that
light.  We give her iron and valerian, and get her on horseback, if we
can, and so expect to make her will come all right again.  By and by we
are called in to see an old baby, threescore years and ten or more old.
We find this old baby has never got rid of that first year's teaching
which led him to fill his stomach with all he could pump into it, and
his hands with everything he could grab.  People call him a miser.  We
are sorry for him; but we can't help remembering his first year's
training, and the natural effect of money on the great majority of those
that have it.  So while the ministers say he 'shall hardly enter into the
kingdom of heaven,' we like to remind them that 'with God all things are
possible.'

"Once more, we see all kinds of monomania and insanity.  We learn from
them to recognize all sorts of queer tendencies in minds supposed to be
sane, so that we have nothing but compassion for a large class of persons
condemned as sinners by theologians, but considered by us as invalids.
We have constant reasons for noticing the transmission of qualities from
parents to offspring, and we find it hard to hold a child accountable in
any moral point of view for inherited bad temper or tendency to
drunkenness,--as hard as we should to blame him for inheriting gout or
asthma.  I suppose we are more lenient with human nature than theologians
generally are.  We know that the spirits of men and their views of the
present and the future go up and down with the barometer, and that a
permanent depression of one inch in the mercurial column would affect the
whole theology of Christendom.

"Ministers talk about the human will as if it stood on a high look-out,
with plenty of light, and elbowroom reaching to the horizon. Doctors are
constantly noticing how it is tied up and darkened by inferior
organization, by disease, and all sorts of crowding interferences, until
they get to look upon Hottentots and Indians--and a good many of their
own race as a kind of self-conscious blood-clocks with very limited power
of self-determination.  That's the tendency, I say, of a doctor's
experience.  But the people to whom they address their statements of the
results of their observation belong to the thinking class of the highest
races, and they are conscious of a great deal of liberty of will.  So in
the face of the fact that civilization with all it offers has proved a
dead failure with the aboriginal races of this country,--on the whole, I
say, a dead failure,--they talk as if they knew from their own will all
about that of a Digger Indian!  We are more apt to go by observation of
the facts in the case.  We are constantly seeing weakness where you see
depravity.  I don't say we're right; I only tell what you must often find
to be the fact, right or wrong, in talking with doctors.  You see, too,
our notions of bodily and moral disease, or sin, are apt to go together.
We used to be as hard on sickness as you were on sin.  We know better
now.  We don't look at sickness as we used to, and try to poison it with
everything that is offensive, burnt toads and earth-worms and
viper-broth, and worse things than these.  We know that disease has
something back of it which the body isn't to blame for, at least in most
cases, and which very often it is trying to get rid of.  Just so with
sin.  I will agree to take a hundred new-born babes of a certain stock
and return seventy-five of them in a dozen years true and honest, if not
'pious' children.  And I will take another hundred, of a different stock,
and put them in the hands of certain Ann-Street or Five-Points teachers,
and seventy-five of them will be thieves and liars at the end of the same
dozen years.  I have heard of an old character, Colonel Jaques, I believe
it was, a famous cattle-breeder, who used to say he could breed to pretty
much any pattern he wanted to.  Well, we doctors see so much of families,
how the tricks of the blood keep breaking out, just as much in character
as they do in looks, that we can't help feeling as if a great many people
hadn't a fair chance to be what is called 'good,' and that there isn't a
text in the Bible better worth keeping always in mind than that one,
'Judge not, that ye be not judged.'

"As for our getting any quarter at the hands of theologians, we don't
expect it, and have no right to.  You don't give each other any quarter.
I have had two religious books sent me by friends within a week or two.
One is Mr. Brownson's; he is as fair and square as Euclid; a real honest,
strong thinker, and one that knows what he is talking about,--for he has
tried all sorts of religions, pretty much. He tells us that the Roman
Catholic Church is the one 'through which alone we can hope for heaven.'
The other is by a worthy Episcopal rector, who appears to write as if he
were in earnest, and he calls the Papacy the 'Devil's Masterpiece,' and
talks about the 'Satanic scheme' of that very Church 'through which
alone,' as Mr. Brownson tells us, 'we can hope for heaven'

"What's the use in our caring about hard words after this,--'atheists,'
heretics, infidels, and the like?  They're, after all, only the cinders
picked up out of those heaps of ashes round the stumps of the old stakes
where they used to burn men, women, and children for not thinking just
like other folks.  They 'll 'crock' your fingers, but they can't burn us.

"Doctors are the best-natured people in the world, except when they get
fighting with each other.  And they have some advantages over you.  You
inherit your notions from a set of priests that had no wives and no
children, or none to speak of, and so let their humanity die out of them.
It did n't seem much to them to condemn a few thousand millions of people
to purgatory or worse for a mistake of judgment.  They didn't know what
it was to have a child look up in their faces and say 'Father!' It will
take you a hundred or two more years to get decently humanized, after so
many centuries of de-humanizing celibacy.

"Besides, though our libraries are, perhaps, not commonly quite so big as
yours, God opens one book to physicians that a good many of you don't
know much about,--the Book of Life.  That is none of your dusty folios
with black letters between pasteboard and leather, but it is printed in
bright red type, and the binding of it is warm and tender to every touch.
They reverence that book as one of the Almighty's infallible revelations.
They will insist on reading you lessons out of it, whether you call them
names or not.  These will always be lessons of charity.  No doubt,
nothing can be more provoking to listen to.  But do beg your folks to
remember that the Smithfield fires are all out, and that the cinders are
very dirty and not in the least dangerous.  They'd a great deal better be
civil, and not be throwing old proverbs in the doctors' faces, when they
say that the man of the old monkish notions is one thing and the man they
watch from his cradle to his coffin is something very different."

It has cost a good deal of trouble to work the Doctor's talk up into this
formal shape.  Some of his sentences have been rounded off for him, and
the whole brought into a more rhetorical form than it could have
pretended to, if taken as it fell from his lips.  But the exact course of
his remarks has been followed, and as far as possible his expressions
have been retained.  Though given in the form of a discourse, it must be
remembered that this was a conversation, much more fragmentary and
colloquial than it seems as just read.

The Reverend Doctor was very far from taking offence at the old
physician's freedom of speech.  He knew him to be honest, kind,
charitable, self-denying, wherever any sorrow was to be alleviated,
always reverential, with a cheerful trust in the great Father of all
mankind.  To be sure, his senior deacon, old Deacon Shearer,--who seemed
to have got his Scripture-teachings out of the "Vinegar Bible," (the one
where Vineyard is misprinted Vinegar; which a good many people seem to
have adopted as the true reading,)--his senior deacon had called Dr.
Kittredge an "infidel."  But the Reverend Doctor could not help feeling,
that, unless the text, "By their fruits ye shall know them," were an
interpolation, the Doctor was the better Christian of the two.  Whatever
his senior deacon might think about it, he said to himself that he
shouldn't be surprised if he met the Doctor in heaven yet, inquiring
anxiously after old Deacon Shearer.

He was on the point of expressing himself very frankly to the Doctor,
with that benevolent smile on his face which had sometimes come near
giving offence to the readers of the "Vinegar" edition, but he saw that
the physician's attention had been arrested by Elsie.  He looked in the
same direction himself, and could not help being struck by her attitude
and expression.  There was something singularly graceful in the curves of
her neck and the rest of her figure, but she was so perfectly still that
it seemed as if she were hardly breathing.  Her eyes were fixed on the
young girl with whom Mr. Bernard was talking. He had often noticed their
brilliancy, but now it seemed to him that they appeared dull, and the
look on her features was as of some passion which had missed its stroke.
Mr. Bernard's companion seemed unconscious that she was the object of
this attention, and was listening to the young master as if he had
succeeded in making himself very agreeable.

Of course Dick Veneer had not mistaken the game that was going on. The
schoolmaster meant to make Elsie jealous,--and he had done it. That 's
it: get her savage first, and then come wheedling round her,--a sure
trick, if he isn't headed off somehow.  But Dick saw well enough that he
had better let Elsie alone just now, and thought the best way of killing
the evening would be to amuse himself in a little lively talk with Mrs.
Blanche Creamer, and incidentally to show Elsie that he could make
himself acceptable to other women, if not to herself.

The Doctor presently went up to Elsie, determined to engage her in
conversation and get her out of her thoughts, which he saw, by her look,
were dangerous.  Her father had been on the point of leaving Helen Darley
to go to her, but felt easy enough when he saw the old Doctor at her
side, and so went on talking.  The Reverend Doctor, being now left alone,
engaged the Widow Rowens, who put the best face on her vexation she
could, but was devoting herself to all the underground deities for having
been such a fool as to ask that pale-faced thing from the Institute to
fill up her party.

There is no space left to report the rest of the conversation.  If there
was anything of any significance in it, it will turn up by and by, no
doubt.  At ten o'clock the Reverend Doctor called Miss Letty, who had no
idea it was so late; Mr. Bernard gave his arm to Helen; Mr. Richard saw
to Mrs. Blanche Creamer; the Doctor gave Elsie a cautioning look, and
went off alone, thoughtful; Dudley Venner and his daughter got into their
carriage and were whirled away.  The Widow's gambit was played, and she
had not won the game.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE WILD HUNTSMAN.

The young master had not forgotten the old Doctor's cautions. Without
attributing any great importance to the warning he had given him, Mr.
Bernard had so far complied with his advice that he was becoming a pretty
good shot with the pistol.  It was an amusement as good as many others to
practise, and he had taken a fancy to it after the first few days.

The popping of a pistol at odd hours in the backyard of the Institute was
a phenomenon more than sufficiently remarkable to be talked about in
Rockland.  The viscous intelligence of a country-village is not easily
stirred by the winds which ripple the fluent thought of great cities, but
it holds every straw and entangles every insect that lights upon it.  It
soon became rumored in the town that the young master was a wonderful
shot with the pistol.  Some said he could hit a fo'pence-ha'penny at
three rod; some, that he had shot a swallow, flying, with a single ball;
some, that he snuffed a candle five times out of six at ten paces, and
that he could hit any button in a man's coat he wanted to.  In other
words, as in all such cases, all the common feats were ascribed to him,
as the current jokes of the day are laid at the door of any noted wit,
however innocent he may be of them.

In the natural course of things, Mr. Richard Venner, who had by this time
made some acquaintances, as we have seen, among that class of the
population least likely to allow a live cinder of gossip to go out for
want of air, had heard incidentally that the master up there at the
Institute was all the time practising with a pistol, that they say he can
snuff a candle at ten rods, (that was Mrs. Blanche Creamer's version,)
and that he could hit anybody he wanted to right in the eye, as far as he
could see the white of it.

Dick did not like the sound of all this any too well.  Without believing
more than half of it, there was enough to make the Yankee schoolmaster
too unsafe to be trifled with.  However, shooting at a mark was pleasant
work enough; he had no particular objection to it himself.  Only he did
not care so much for those little popgun affairs that a man carries in
his pocket, and with which you could n't shoot a fellow,--a robber,
say,--without getting the muzzle under his nose.  Pistols for boys;
long-range rifles for men.  There was such a gun lying in a closet with
the fowling-pieces.  He would go out into the fields and see what he
could do as a marksman.

The nature of the mark which Dick chose for experimenting upon was
singular.  He had found some panes of glass which had been removed from
an old sash, and he placed these successively before his target,
arranging them at different angles.  He found that a bullet would go
through the glass without glancing or having its force materially abated.
It was an interesting fact in physics, and might prove of some practical
significance hereafter.  Nobody knows what may turn up to render these
out-of-the-way facts useful.  All this was done in a quiet way in one of
the bare spots high up the side of The Mountain. He was very thoughtful
in taking the precaution to get so far away; rifle-bullets are apt to
glance and come whizzing about people's ears, if they are fired in the
neighborhood of houses.  Dick satisfied himself that he could be
tolerably sure of hitting a pane of glass at a distance of thirty rods,
more or less, and that, if there happened to be anything behind it, the
glass would not materially alter the force or direction of the bullet.

About this time it occurred to him also that there was an old
accomplishment of his which he would be in danger of losing for want of
practice, if he did not take some opportunity to try his hand and regain
its cunning, if it had begun to be diminished by disuse.  For his first
trial, he chose an evening when the moon was shining, and after the hour
when the Rockland people were like to be stirring abroad.  He was so far
established now that he could do much as he pleased without exciting
remark.

The prairie horse he rode, the mustang of the Pampas, wild as he was, had
been trained to take part in at least one exercise.  This was the
accomplishment in which Mr. Richard now proposed to try himself.  For
this purpose he sought the implement of which, as it may be remembered,
he had once made an incidental use,--the lasso, or long strip of hide
with a slip-noose at the end of it.  He had been accustomed to playing
with such a thong from his boyhood, and had become expert in its use in
capturing wild cattle in the course of his adventures.  Unfortunately,
there were no wild bulls likely to be met with in the neighborhood, to
become the subjects of his skill.  A stray cow in the road, an ox or a
horse in a pasture, must serve his turn,--dull beasts, but moving marks
to aim at, at any rate.

Never, since he had galloped in the chase over the Pampas, had Dick
Venner felt such a sense of life and power as when he struck the long
spurs into his wild horse's flanks, and dashed along the road with the
lasso lying like a coiled snake at the saddle-bow.  In skilful hands, the
silent, bloodless noose, flying like an arrow, but not like that leaving
a wound behind it,--sudden as a pistol-shot, but without the telltale
explosion,--is one of the most fearful and mysterious weapons that arm
the hand of man.  The old Romans knew how formidable, even in contest
with a gladiator equipped with sword, helmet, and shield, was the almost
naked retiarius, with his net in one hand and his three-pronged javelin
in the other.  Once get a net over a man's head, or a cord round his
neck, or, what is more frequently done nowadays, bonnet him by knocking
his hat down over his eyes, and he is at the mercy of his opponent.  Our
soldiers who served against the Mexicans found this out too well.  Many a
poor fellow has been lassoed by the fierce riders from the plains, and
fallen an easy victim to the captor who had snared him in the fatal
noose.

But, imposing as the sight of the wild huntsmen of the Pampas might have
been, Dick could not help laughing at the mock sublimity of his
situation, as he tried his first experiment on an unhappy milky mother
who had strayed from her herd and was wandering disconsolately along the
road, laying the dust, as slue went, with thready streams from her
swollen, swinging udders.  "Here goes the Don at the windmill!" said
Dick, and tilted full speed at her, whirling the lasso round his head as
he rode.  The creature swerved to one side of the way, as the wild horse
and his rider came rushing down upon her, and presently turned and ran,
as only cows and it would n't be safe to say it--can run.  Just before he
passed,--at twenty or thirty feet from her,--the lasso shot from his
hand, uncoiling as it flew, and in an instant its loop was round her
horns.  "Well cast!" said Dick, as he galloped up to her side and
dexterously disengaged the lasso. "Now for a horse on the run!"

He had the good luck to find one, presently, grazing in a pasture at the
road-side.  Taking down the rails of the fence at one point, he drove the
horse into the road and gave chase.  It was a lively young animal enough,
and was easily roused to a pretty fast pace.  As his gallop grew more and
more rapid, Dick gave the reins to the mustang, until the two horses
stretched themselves out in their longest strides.  If the first feat
looked like play, the one he was now to attempt had a good deal the
appearance of real work.  He touched the mustang with the spur, and in a
few fierce leaps found himself nearly abreast of the frightened animal he
was chasing.  Once more he whirled the lasso round and round over his
head, and then shot it forth, as the rattlesnake shoots his head from the
loops against which it rests.  The noose was round the horse's neck, and
in another instant was tightened so as almost to stop his breath.  The
prairie horse knew the trick of the cord, and leaned away from the
captive, so as to keep the thong tensely stretched between his neck and
the peak of the saddle to which it was fastened.  Struggling was of no
use with a halter round his windpipe, and he very soon began to tremble
and stagger,--blind, no doubt, and with a roaring in his ears as of a
thousand battle-trumpets,--at any rate, subdued and helpless. That was
enough.  Dick loosened his lasso, wound it up again, laid it like a pet
snake in a coil at his saddle-bow, turned his horse, and rode slowly
along towards the mansion-house.

The place had never looked more stately and beautiful to him than as he
now saw it in the moonlight.  The undulations of the land,--the grand
mountain screen which sheltered the mansion from the northern blasts,
rising with all its hanging forests and parapets of naked rock high
towards the heavens,--the ancient mansion, with its square chimneys, and
bodyguard of old trees, and cincture of low walls with marble-pillared
gateways,--the fields, with their various coverings,--the beds of
flowers,--the plots of turf, one with a gray column in its centre bearing
a sundial on which the rays of the moon were idly shining, another with a
white stone and a narrow ridge of turf,--over all these objects,
harmonized with all their infinite details into one fair whole by the
moonlight, the prospective heir, as he deemed himself, looked with
admiring eyes.

But while he looked, the thought rose up in his mind like waters from a
poisoned fountain, that there was a deep plot laid to cheat him of the
inheritance which by a double claim he meant to call his own. Every day
this ice-cold beauty, this dangerous, handsome cousin of his, went up to
that place,--that usher's girl-trap.  Everyday,--regularly now,--it used
to be different.  Did she go only to get out of his, her cousin's, reach?
Was she not rather becoming more and more involved in the toils of this
plotting Yankee?

If Mr. Bernard had shown himself at that moment a few rods in advance,
the chances are that in less than one minute he would have found himself
with a noose round his neck, at the heels of a mounted horseman.
Providence spared him for the present.  Mr. Richard rode his horse
quietly round to the stable, put him up, and proceeded towards the house.
He got to his bed without disturbing the family, but could not sleep.
The idea had fully taken possession of his mind that a deep intrigue was
going on which would end by bringing Elsie and the schoolmaster into
relations fatal to all his own hopes.  With that ingenuity which always
accompanies jealousy, he tortured every circumstance of the last few
weeks so as to make it square with this belief.  From this vein of
thought he naturally passed to a consideration of every possible method
by which the issue he feared might be avoided.

Mr. Richard talked very plain language with himself in all these inward
colloquies.  Supposing it came to the worst, what could be done then?
First, an accident might happen to the schoolmaster which should put a
complete and final check upon his projects and contrivances.  The
particular accident which might interrupt his career must, evidently, be
determined by circumstances; but it must be of a nature to explain itself
without the necessity of any particular person's becoming involved in the
matter.  It would be unpleasant to go into particulars; but everybody
knows well enough that men sometimes get in the way of a stray bullet,
and that young persons occasionally do violence to themselves in various
modes,--by firearms, suspension, and other means,--in consequence of
disappointment in love, perhaps, oftener than from other motives. There
was still another kind of accident which might serve his purpose.  If
anything should happen to Elsie, it would be the most natural thing in
the world that his uncle should adopt him, his nephew and only near
relation, as his heir.  Unless, indeed, uncle Dudley should take it into
his head to marry again.  In that case, where would he, Dick, be?  This
was the most detestable complication which he could conceive of.  And yet
he had noticed--he could not help noticing--that his uncle had been very
attentive to, and, as it seemed, very much pleased with, that young woman
from the school. What did that mean?  Was it possible that he was going
to take a fancy to her?

It made him wild to think of all the several contingencies which might
defraud him of that good-fortune which seemed but just now within his
grasp.  He glared in the darkness at imaginary faces: sometimes at that
of the handsome, treacherous schoolmaster; sometimes at that of the
meek-looking, but no doubt, scheming, lady-teacher; sometimes at that of
the dark girl whom he was ready to make his wife; sometimes at that of
his much respected uncle, who, of course, could not be allowed to peril
the fortunes of his relatives by forming a new connection.  It was a
frightful perplexity in which he found himself, because there was no one
single life an accident to which would be sufficient to insure the
fitting and natural course of descent to the great Dudley property.  If
it had been a simple question of helping forward a casualty to any one
person, there was nothing in Dick's habits of thought and living to make
that a serious difficulty.  He had been so much with lawless people, that
a life between his wish and his object seemed only as an obstacle to be
removed, provided the object were worth the risk and trouble.  But if
there were two or three lives in the way, manifestly that altered the
case.

His Southern blood was getting impatient.  There was enough of the
New-Englander about him to make him calculate his chances before he
struck; but his plans were liable to be defeated at any moment by a
passionate impulse such as the dark-hued races of Southern Europe and
their descendants are liable to.  He lay in his bed, sometimes arranging
plans to meet the various difficulties already mentioned, sometimes
getting into a paroxysm of blind rage in the perplexity of considering
what object he should select as the one most clearly in his way.  On the
whole, there could be no doubt where the most threatening of all his
embarrassments lay.  It was in the probable growing relation between
Elsie and the schoolmaster.  If it should prove, as it seemed likely,
that there was springing up a serious attachment tending to a union
between them, he knew what he should do, if he was not quite so sure how
he should do it.

There was one thing at least which might favor his projects, and which,
at any rate, would serve to amuse him.  He could, by a little quiet
observation, find out what were the schoolmaster's habits of life:
whether he had any routine which could be calculated upon; and under what
circumstances a strictly private interview of a few minutes with him
might be reckoned on, in case it should be desirable.  He could also very
probably learn some facts about Elsie. whether the young man was in the
habit of attending her on her way home from school; whether she stayed
about the schoolroom after the other girls had gone; and any incidental
matters of interest which might present themselves.

He was getting more and more restless for want of some excitement.  A mad
gallop, a visit to Mrs. Blanche Creamer, who had taken such a fancy to
him, or a chat with the Widow Rowens, who was very lively in her talk,
for all her sombre colors, and reminded him a good deal of same of his
earlier friends, the senoritas,--all these were distractions, to be sure,
but not enough to keep his fiery spirit from fretting itself in longings
for more dangerous excitements.  The thought of getting a knowledge of
all Mr. Bernard's ways, so that he would be in his power at any moment,
was a happy one.

For some days after this he followed Elsie at a long distance behind, to
watch her until she got to the schoolhouse.  One day he saw Mr. Bernard
join her: a mere accident, very probably, for it was only once this
happened.  She came on her homeward way alone,--quite apart from the
groups of girls who strolled out of the schoolhouse yard in company.
Sometimes she was behind them all,--which was suggestive. Could she have
stayed to meet the schoolmaster?

If he could have smuggled himself into the school, he would have liked to
watch her there, and see if there was not some understanding between her
and the master which betrayed itself by look or word. But this was beyond
the limits of his audacity, and he had to content himself with such
cautious observations as could be made at a distance.  With the aid of a
pocket-glass he could make out persons without the risk of being observed
himself.

Mr. Silos Peckham's corps of instructors was not expected to be off duty
or to stand at ease for any considerable length of time. Sometimes Mr.
Bernard, who had more freedom than the rest, would go out for a ramble in
the daytime, but more frequently it would be in the evening, after the
hour of "retiring," as bedtime was elegantly termed by the young ladies
of the Apollinean Institute.  He would then not unfrequently walk out
alone in the common roads, or climb up the sides of The Mountain, which
seemed to be one of his favorite resorts.  Here, of course, it was
impossible to follow him with the eye at a distance.  Dick had a hideous,
gnawing suspicion that somewhere in these deep shades the schoolmaster
might meet Elsie, whose evening wanderings he knew so well.  But of this
he was not able to assure himself.  Secrecy was necessary to his present
plans, and he could not compromise himself by over-eager curiosity.  One
thing he learned with certainty.  The master returned, after his walk one
evening, and entered the building where his room was situated. Presently
a light betrayed the window of his apartment.  From a wooded bank, some
thirty or forty rods from this building, Dick Venner could see the
interior of the chamber, and watch the master as he sat at his desk, the
light falling strongly upon his face, intent upon the book or manuscript
before him.  Dick contemplated him very long in this attitude.  The sense
of watching his every motion, himself meanwhile utterly unseen, was
delicious.  How little the master was thinking what eyes were on him!

Well,--there were two things quite certain.  One was, that, if he chose,
he could meet the schoolmaster alone, either in the road or in a more
solitary place, if he preferred to watch his chance for an evening or
two.  The other was, that he commanded his position, as he sat at his
desk in the evening, in such a way that there would be very little
difficulty,--so far as that went; of course, however, silence is always
preferable to noise, and there is a great difference in the marks left by
different casualties.  Very likely nothing would come of all this
espionage; but, at any rate, the first thing to be done with a man you
want to have in your power is to learn his habits.

Since the tea-party at the Widow Rowens's, Elsie had been more fitful and
moody than ever.  Dick understood all this well enough, you know. It was
the working of her jealousy against that young schoolgirl to whom the
master had devoted himself for the sake of piquing the heiress of the
Dudley mansion.  Was it possible, in any way, to exasperate her irritable
nature against him, and in this way to render her more accessible to his
own advances?  It was difficult to influence her at all.  She endured his
company without seeming to enjoy it.  She watched him with that strange
look of hers, sometimes as if she were on her guard against him,
sometimes as if she would like to strike at him as in that fit of
childish passion.  She ordered him about with a haughty indifference
which reminded him of his own way with the dark-eyed women whom he had
known so well of old.  All this added a secret pleasure to the other
motives he had for worrying her with jealous suspicions.  He knew she
brooded silently on any grief that poisoned her comfort,--that she fed on
it, as it were, until it ran with every drop of blood in her veins,--and
that, except in some paroxysm of rage, of which he himself was not likely
the second time to be the object, or in some deadly vengeance wrought
secretly, against which he would keep a sharp lookout, so far as he was
concerned, she had no outlet for her dangerous, smouldering passions.

Beware of the woman who cannot find free utterance for all her stormy
inner life either in words or song!  So long as a woman can talk, there
is nothing she cannot bear.  If she cannot have a companion to listen to
her woes, and has no musical utterance, vocal or instrumental,--then, if
she is of the real woman sort, and has a few heartfuls of wild blood in
her, and you have done her a wrong,--double-bolt the door which she may
enter on noiseless slipper at midnight,--look twice before you taste of
any cup whose draught the shadow of her hand may have darkened!

But let her talk, and, above all, cry, or, if she is one of the
coarser-grained tribe, give her the run of all the red-hot expletives in
the language, and let her blister her lips with them until she is tired,
she will sleep like a lamb after it, and you may take a cup of coffee
from her without stirring it up to look for its sediment.

So, if she can sing, or play on any musical instrument, all her
wickedness will run off through her throat or the tips of her fingers.
How many tragedies find their peaceful catastrophe in fierce roulades and
strenuous bravuras!  How many murders are executed in double-quick time
upon the keys which stab the air with their dagger-strokes of sound!
What would our civilization be without the piano?  Are not Erard and
Broadwood and Chickering the true humanizers of our time?  Therefore do I
love to hear the all-pervading tum tum jarring the walls of little
parlors in houses with double door-plates on their portals, looking out
on streets and courts which to know is to be unknown, and where to exist
is not to live, according to any true definition of living.  Therefore
complain I not of modern degeneracy, when, even from the open window of
the small unlovely farmhouse, tenanted by the hard-handed man of bovine
flavors and the flat-patterned woman of broken-down countenance, issue
the same familiar sounds.  For who knows that Almira, but for these keys,
which throb away her wild impulses in harmless discords would not have
been floating, dead, in the brown stream which slides through the meadows
by her father's door,--or living, with that other current which runs
beneath the gas-lights over the slimy pavement, choking with wretched
weeds that were once in spotless flower?

Poor Elsie!  She never sang nor played.  She never shaped her inner life
in words: such utterance was as much denied to her nature as common
articulate speech to the deaf mute.  Her only language must be in action.
Watch her well by day and by night, old Sophy! watch her well! or the
long line of her honored name may close in shame, and the stately mansion
of the Dudleys remain a hissing and a reproach till its roof is buried in
its cellar!




CHAPTER XXIV.

ON HIS TRACKS.

"Able!"  said the old Doctor, one morning, "after you've harnessed
Caustic, come into the study a few minutes, will you?"

Abel nodded.  He was a man of few words, and he knew that the "will you"
did not require an answer, being the true New-England way of rounding the
corners of an employer's order,--a tribute to the personal independence
of an American citizen.

The hired man came into the study in the course of a few minutes. His
face was perfectly still, and he waited to be spoken to; but the Doctor's
eye detected a certain meaning in his expression, which looked as if he
had something to communicate.

"Well?" said the Doctor.

"He's up to mischief o' some kind, I guess," said Abel.  "I jest happened
daown by the mansion-haouse last night, 'n' he come aout o' the gate on
that queer-lookin' creator' o' his.  I watched him, 'n' he rid, very
slow, all raoun' by the Institoot, 'n' acted as ef he was spyin' abaout.
He looks to me like a man that's calc'latin' to do some kind of ill-turn
to somebody.  I should n't like to have him raoun' me, 'f there wa'n't a
pitchfork or an eel-spear or some sech weep'n within reach.  He may be
all right; but I don't like his looks, 'n' I don't see what he's lurkin'
raoun' the Institoot for, after folks is abed."

"Have you watched him pretty close for the last few days?" said the
Doctor.

"W'll, yes,--I've had my eye on him consid'ble o' the time.  I haf to be
pooty shy abaout it, or he'll find aout th't I'm on his tracks.  I don'
want him to get a spite ag'inst me, 'f I c'n help it; he looks to me like
one o' them kind that kerries what they call slung-shot, 'n' hits ye on
the side o' th' head with 'em so suddin y' never know what hurts ye."

"Why," said the Doctor, sharply,--"have you ever seen him with any such
weapon about him?"

"W'll, no,--I caan't say that I hev," Abel answered.  "On'y he looks kin'
o' dangerous.  Maybe he's all jest 'z he ought to be,--I caan't say that
he a'n't,--but he's aout late nights, 'n' lurkin' raonn' jest 'z ef he
was spyin' somebody, 'n' somehaow I caan't help mistrustin' them
Portagee-lookin' fellahs.  I caan't keep the run o' this chap all the
time; but I've a notion that old black woman daown 't the mansion-haouse
knows 'z much abaout him 'z anybody."

The Doctor paused a moment, after hearing this report from his private
detective, and then got into his chaise, and turned Caustic's head in the
direction of the Dudley mansion.  He had been suspicious of Dick from the
first.  He did not like his mixed blood, nor his looks, nor his ways.  He
had formed a conjecture about his projects early.  He had made a shrewd
guess as to the probable jealousy Dick would feel of the schoolmaster,
had found out something of his movements, and had cautioned Mr.
Bernard,--as we have seen.  He felt an interest in the young man,--a
student of his own profession, an intelligent and ingenuously
unsuspecting young fellow, who had been thrown by accident into the
companionship or the neighborhood of two persons, one of whom he knew to
be dangerous, and the other he believed instinctively might be capable of
crime.

The Doctor rode down to the Dudley mansion solely for the sake of seeing
old Sophy.  He was lucky enough to find her alone in her kitchen.  He
began taking with her as a physician; he wanted to know how her
rheumatism had been.  The shrewd old woman saw through all that with her
little beady black eyes.  It was something quite different he had come
for, and old Sophy answered very briefly for her aches and ails.

"Old folks' bones a'n't like young folks'," she said.  "It's the Lord's
doin's, 'n' 't a'n't much matter.  I sha'n' be long roan' this kitchen.
It's the young Missis, Doctor,--it 's our Elsie,--it 's the baby, as we
use' t' call her,--don' you remember, Doctor?  Seventeen year ago, 'n'
her poor mother cryin' for her,--'Where is she? where is she?  Let me see
her!  '--'n' how I run up-stairs,--I could run then,--'n' got the coral
necklace 'n' put it round her little neck, 'n' then showed her to her
mother,--'n' how her mother looked at her, 'n' looked, 'n' then put out
her poor thin fingers 'n' lifted the necklace,--'n' fell right back on
her piller, as white as though she was laid out to bury?"

The Doctor answered her by silence and a look of grave assent.  He had
never chosen to let old Sophy dwell upon these matters, for obvious
reasons.  The girl must not grow up haunted by perpetual fears and
prophecies, if it were possible to prevent it.

"Well, how has Elsie seemed of late?"  he said, after this brief pause.

The old woman shook her head.  Then she looked up at the Doctor so
steadily and searchingly that the diamond eyes of Elsie herself could
hardly have pierced more deeply.

The Doctor raised his head, by his habitual movement, and met the old
woman's look with his own calm and scrutinizing gaze, sharpened by the
glasses through which he now saw her.

Sophy spoke presently in an awed tone, as if telling a vision.

"We shall be havin' trouble before long.  The' 's somethin' comin' from
the Lord.  I've had dreams, Doctor.  It's many a year I've been
a-dreamin', but now they're comin' over 'n' over the same thing. Three
times I've dreamed one thing, Doctor,--one thing!"

"And what was that?" the Doctor said, with that shade of curiosity in his
tone which a metaphysician would probably say is an index of a certain
tendency to belief in the superstition to which the question refers.

"I ca'n' jestly tell y' what it was, Doctor," the old woman answered, as
if bewildered and trying to clear up her recollections; "but it was
somethin' fearful, with a great noise 'n' a great cryin' o' people,--like
the Las' Day, Doctor!  The Lord have mercy on my poor chil', 'n' take
care of her, if anything happens!  But I's feared she'll never live to
see the Las' Day, 'f 't don' come pooty quick."

Poor Sophy, only the third generation from cannibalism, was, not
unnaturally, somewhat confused in her theological notions.  Some of the
Second-Advent preachers had been about, and circulated their predictions
among the kitchen--population of Rockland.  This was the way in which it
happened that she mingled her fears in such a strange manner with their
doctrines.

The Doctor answered solemnly, that of the day and hour we knew not, but
it became us to be always ready.--"Is there anything going on in the
household different from common?"

Old Sophy's wrinkled face looked as full of life and intelligence, when
she turned it full upon the Doctor, as if she had slipped off her
infirmities and years like an outer garment.  All those fine instincts of
observation which came straight to her from her savage grandfather looked
out of her little eyes.  She had a kind of faith that the Doctor was a
mighty conjurer, who, if he would, could bewitch any of them.  She had
relieved her feelings by her long talk with the minister, but the Doctor
was the immediate adviser of the family, and had watched them through all
their troubles.  Perhaps he could tell them what to do.  She had but one
real object of affection in the world,--this child that she had tended
from infancy to womanhood.  Troubles were gathering thick round her; how
soon they would break upon her, and blight or destroy her, no one could
tell; but there was nothing in all the catalogue of terrors which might
not come upon the household at any moment.  Her own wits had sharpened
themselves in keeping watch by day and night, and her face had forgotten
its age in the excitement which gave life to its features.

"Doctor," old Sophy said, "there's strange things goin' on here by night
and by day.  I don' like that man,--that Dick,--I never liked him.  He
giv' me some o' these things I' got on; I take 'em 'cos I know it make
him mad, if I no take 'em; I wear 'em, so that he need n' feel as if I
did n' like him; but, Doctor, I hate him,--jes' as much as a member of
the church has the Lord's leave to hate anybody."

Her eyes sparkled with the old savage light, as if her ill-will to Mr.
Richard Veneer might perhaps go a little farther than the Christian limit
she had assigned.  But remember that her grandfather was in the habit of
inviting his friends to dine with him upon the last enemy he had bagged,
and that her grandmother's teeth were filed down to points, so that they
were as sharp as a shark's.

"What is that you have seen about Mr. Richard Veneer that gives you such
a spite against him, Sophy?"  asked the Doctor.

"What I' seen 'bout Dick Veneer?" she replied, fiercely.  "I'll tell y'
what I' seen.  Dick wan's to marry our Elsie,--that 's what he wan's; 'n'
he don' love her, Doctor,--he hates her, Doctor, as bad as I hate him!
He wan's to marry our Elsie, In' live here in the big house, 'n' have
nothin' to do but jes' lay still 'n' watch Massa Venner 'n' see how
long 't Ill take him to die, 'n' 'f he don' die fas' 'puff, help him some
way t' die fasser!--Come close up t' me, Doctor!  I wan' t' tell you
somethin' I tol' th' minister t' other day.  Th' minister, he come down
'n' prayed 'n' talked good,--he's a good man, that Doctor Honeywood, 'n'
I tol' him all 'bout our Elsie, but he did n' tell nobody what to do to
stop all what I' been dreamin' about happenin'.  Come close up to me,
Doctor!"

The Doctor drew his chair close up to that of the old woman.

"Doctor, nobody mus'n' never marry our Elsie 's longs she lives! Nobody
mus' n' never live with Elsie but ol Sophy; 'n' ol Sophy won't never die
's long 's Elsie 's alive to be took care of.  But I's feared, Doctor,
I's greatly feared Elsie wan' to marry somebody. The' 's a young
gen'l'm'n up at that school where she go,--so some of 'em tells me, 'n'
she loves t' see him 'n' talk wi' him, 'n' she talks about him when she
's asleep sometimes.  She mus 'n' never marry nobody, Doctor!  If she do,
he die, certain!"

"If she has a fancy for the young man up at the school there," the Doctor
said, "I shouldn't think there would be much danger from Dick."

"Doctor, nobody know nothin' 'bout Elsie but of Sophy.  She no like any
other creator' th't ever drawed the bref o' life.  If she ca'n' marry one
man 'cos she love him, she marry another man 'cos she hate him."

"Marry a man because she hates him, Sophy?  No woman ever did such a
thing as that, or ever will do it."

"Who tol' you Elsie was a woman, Doctor?"  said old Sophy, with a flash
of strange intelligence in her eyes.

The Doctor's face showed that he was startled.  The old woman could not
know much about Elsie that he did not know; but what strange superstition
had got into her head, he was puzzled to guess.  He had better follow
Sophy's lead and find out what she meant.

"I should call Elsie a woman, and a very handsome one," he said. "You
don't mean that she has any mark about her, except--you know--under the
necklace?"

The old woman resented the thought of any deformity about her darling.

"I did n' say she had nothin'--but jes' that--you know.  My beauty have
anything ugly?  She's the beautifullest-shaped lady that ever had a
shinin' silk gown drawed over her shoulders.  On'y she a'n't like no
other woman in none of her ways.  She don't cry 'n' laugh like other
women.  An' she ha'n' got the same kind o' feelin's as other women.--Do
you know that young gen'l'm'n up at the school, Doctor?"

"Yes, Sophy, I've met him sometimes.  He's a very nice sort of young man,
handsome, too, and I don't much wonder Elsie takes to him.  Tell me,
Sophy, what do you think would happen, if he should chance to fall in
love with Elsie, and she with him, and he should marry her?"

"Put your ear close to my lips, Doctor, dear!"  She whispered a little to
the Doctor, then added aloud, "He die,--that's all."

"But surely, Sophy, you a'n't afraid to have Dick marry her, if she would
have him for any reason, are you?  He can take care of himself, if
anybody can."

"Doctor!" Sophy answered, "nobody can take care of hisself that live wi'
Elsie!  Nobody never in all this worl' mus' live wi' Elsie but of Sophy,
I tell you.  You don' think I care for Dick?  What do I care, if Dick
Venner die?  He wan's to marry our Elsie so 's to live in the big house
'n' get all the money 'n' all the silver things 'n' all the chists full
o' linen 'n' beautiful clothes.  That's what Dick wan's. An' he hates
Elsie 'cos she don' like him.  But if he marry Elsie, she 'll make him
die some wrong way or other, 'n' they'll take her 'n' hang her, or he'll
get mad with her 'n' choke her.--Oh, I know his chokin' tricks!--he don'
leave his keys roun' for nothin'"

"What's that you say, Sophy?  Tell me what you mean by all that."

So poor Sophy had to explain certain facts not in all respects to her
credit.  She had taken the opportunity of his absence to look about his
chamber, and, having found a key in one of his drawers, had applied it to
a trunk, and, finding that it opened the trunk, had made a kind of
inspection for contraband articles, and, seeing the end of a leather
thong, had followed it up until she saw that it finished with a noose,
which, from certain appearances, she inferred to have seen service of at
least doubtful nature.  An unauthorized search; but old Sophy considered
that a game of life and death was going on in the household, and that she
was bound to look out for her darling.

The Doctor paused a moment to think over this odd piece of information.
Without sharing Sophy's belief as to the kind of use this
mischievous-looking piece of property had been put to, it was certainly
very odd that Dick should have such a thing at the bottom of his trunk.
The Doctor remembered reading or hearing something about the lasso and
the lariat and the bolas, and had an indistinct idea that they had been
sometimes used as weapons of warfare or private revenge; but they were
essentially a huntsman's implements, after all, and it was not very
strange that this young man had brought one of them with him.  Not
strange, perhaps, but worth noting.

"Do you really think Dick means mischief to anybody, that he has such
dangerous-looking things?"  the Doctor said, presently.

"I tell you, Doctor. Dick means to have Elsie.  If he ca'n' get her, he
never let nobody else have her!  Oh, Dick 's a dark man, Doctor! I know
him!  I 'member him when he was little boy,--he always cunin'. I think he
mean mischief to somebody.  He come home late nights,--come in
softly,--oh, I hear him!  I lay awake, 'n' got sharp ears,--I hear the
cats walkin' over the roofs,--'n' I hear Dick Veneer, when he comes up in
his stockin'-feet as still as a cat.  I think he mean' mischief to
somebody.  I no like his looks these las' days.--Is that a very pooty
gen'l'm'n up at the schoolhouse, Doctor?"

"I told you he was good-looking.  What if he is?"

"I should like to see him, Doctor,--I should like to see the pooty
gen'l'm'n that my poor Elsie loves.  She mus 'n' never marry nobody,
--but, oh, Doctor, I should like to see him, 'n' jes' think a little how
it would ha' been, if the Lord had n' been so hard on Elsie."

She wept and wrung her hands.  The kind Doctor was touched, and left her
a moment to her thoughts.

"And how does Mr. Dudley Veneer take all this?" he said, by way of
changing the subject a little.

"Oh, Massa Veneer, he good man, but he don' know nothin' 'bout Elsie, as
of Sophy do.  I keep close by her; I help her when she go to bed, 'n' set
by her sometime when she--'sleep; I come to her in th' mornin' 'n' help
her put on her things."--Then, in a whisper;--"Doctor, Elsie lets of
Sophy take off that necklace for her.  What you think she do, 'f anybody
else tech it?"

"I don't know, I'm sure, Sophy,--strike the person, perhaps."

"Oh, yes, strike 'em! but not with her han's, Doctor!"--The old woman's
significant pantomime must be guessed at.

"But you haven't told me, Sophy, what Mr. Dudley Veneer thinks of his
nephew, nor whether he has any notion that Dick wants to marry Elsie."

"I tell you.  Massa Venner, he good man, but he no see nothin' 'bout what
goes on here in the house.  He sort o' broken-hearted, you know,--sort o'
giv up,--don' know what to do wi' Elsie, 'xcep' say 'Yes, yes.'  Dick
always look smilin' 'n' behave well before him. One time I thought Massa
Veneer b'lieve Dick was goin' to take to Elsie; but now he don' seem to
take much notice,--he kin' o' stupid-' like 'bout sech things.  It's
trouble, Doctor; 'cos Massa Veneer bright man naterally,--'n' he's got a
great heap o' books.  I don' think Massa Veneer never been jes' heself
sence Elsie 's born.  He done all he know how,--but, Doctor, that wa'n' a
great deal.  You men-folks don' know nothin' 'bout these young gals; 'n'
'f you knowed all the young gals that ever lived, y' would n' know
nothin' 'bout our Elsie."

"No,--but, Sophy, what I want to know is, whether you think Mr. Veneer
has any kind of suspicion about his nephew,--whether he has any notion
that he's a dangerous sort of fellow,--or whether he feels safe to have
him about, or has even taken a sort of fancy to him."

"Lar' bless you, Doctor, Massa Veneer no more idee 'f any mischief 'bout
Dick than he has 'bout you or me.  Y' see, he very fond o' the
Cap'n,--that Dick's father,--'n' he live so long alone here, 'long wi'
us, that he kin' o' like to see mos' anybody 't 's got any o' th' of
family-blood in 'em.  He ha'n't got no more suspicions 'n a baby,--y'
never see sech a man 'n y'r life.  I kin' o' think he don' care for
nothin' in this world 'xcep' jes' t' do what Elsie wan's him to. The fus'
year after young Madam die he do nothin' but jes' set at the window 'n'
look out at her grave, 'n' then come up 'n' look at the baby's neck 'n'
say, 'It's fadin', Sophy, a'n't it? 'n' then go down in the study 'n'
walk 'n' walk, 'n' them kneel down 'n' pray. Doctor, there was two places
in the old carpet that was all threadbare, where his knees had worn 'em.
An' sometimes, you remember 'bout all that,--he'd go off up into The
Mountain, 'n' be gone all day, 'n' kill all the Ugly Things he could find
up there.--Oh, Doctor, I don' like to think o' them days!--An' by 'n'
by he grew kin' o' still, 'n' begun to read a little, 'n' 't las' he got
's quiet's a lamb, 'n' that's the way he is now.  I think he's got
religion, Doctor; but he a'n't so bright about what's goin' on, 'n' I
don' believe he never suspec' nothin' till somethin' happens; for the' 's
somethin' goin' to happen, Doctor, if the Las' Day does n' come to stop
it; 'n' you mus' tell us what to do, 'n' save my poor Elsie, my baby that
the Lord has n' took care of like all his other childer."

The Doctor assured the old woman that he was thinking a great deal about
them all, and that there were other eyes on Dick besides her own.  Let
her watch him closely about the house, and he would keep a look-out
elsewhere.  If there was anything new, she must let him know at once.
Send up one of the menservants, and he would come down at a moment's
warning.

There was really nothing definite against this young man; but the Doctor
was sure that he was meditating some evil design or other.  He rode
straight up to the Institute.  There he saw Mr. Bernard, and had a brief
conversation with him, principally on matters relating to his personal
interests.

That evening, for some unknown reason, Mr. Bernard changed the place of
his desk and drew down the shades of his windows.  Late that night Mr.
Richard Venner drew the charge of a rifle, and put the gun back among the
fowling-pieces, swearing that a leather halter was worth a dozen of it.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE PERILOUS HOUR.

Up to this time Dick Venner had not decided on the particular mode and
the precise period of relieving himself from the unwarrantable
interference which threatened to defeat his plans.  The luxury of feeling
that he had his man in his power was its own reward.  One who watches in
the dark, outside, while his enemy, in utter unconsciousness, is
illuminating his apartment and himself so that every movement of his head
and every button on his coat can be seen and counted, experiences a
peculiar kind of pleasure, if he holds a loaded rifle in his hand, which
he naturally hates to bring to its climax by testing his skill as a
marksman upon the object of his attention.

Besides, Dick had two sides in his nature, almost as distinct as we
sometimes observe in those persons who are the subjects of the condition
known as double consciousness.  On his New England side he was cunning
and calculating, always cautious, measuring his distance before he risked
his stroke, as nicely as if he were throwing his lasso.  But he was
liable to intercurrent fits of jealousy and rage, such as the light-hued
races are hardly capable of conceiving, blinding paroxysms of passion,
which for the time overmastered him, and which, if they found no ready
outlet, transformed themselves into the more dangerous forces that worked
through the instrumentality of his cool craftiness.

He had failed as yet in getting any positive evidence that there was any
relation between Elsie and the schoolmaster other than such as might
exist unsuspected and unblamed between a teacher and his pupil. A book,
or a note, even, did not prove the existence of any sentiment.  At one
time he would be devoured by suspicions, at another he would try to laugh
himself out of them.  And in the mean while he followed Elsie's tastes as
closely as he could, determined to make some impression upon her,--to
become a habit, a convenience, a necessity,--whatever might aid him in
the attainment of the one end which was now the aim of his life.

It was to humor one of her tastes already known to the reader, that he
said to her one morning,--"Come, Elsie, take your castanets, and let us
have a dance."

He had struck the right vein in the girl's fancy, for she was in the mood
for this exercise, and very willingly led the way into one of the more
empty apartments.  What there was in this particular kind of dance which
excited her it might not be easy to guess; but those who looked in with
the old Doctor, on a former occasion, and saw her, will remember that she
was strangely carried away by it, and became almost fearful in the
vehemence of her passion.  The sound of the castanets seemed to make her
alive all over.  Dick knew well enough what the exhibition would be, and
was almost afraid of her at these moments; for it was like the dancing
mania of Eastern devotees, more than the ordinary light amusement of
joyous youth,--a convulsion of the body and the mind, rather than a
series of voluntary modulated motions.

Elsie rattled out the triple measure of a saraband.  Her eyes began to
glitter more brilliantly, and her shape to undulate in freer curves.
Presently she noticed that Dick's look was fixed upon her necklace.  His
face betrayed his curiosity; he was intent on solving the question, why
she always wore something about her neck.  The chain of mosaics she had
on at that moment displaced itself at every step, and he was peering with
malignant, searching eagerness to see if an unsunned ring of fairer hue
than the rest of the surface, or any less easily explained peculiarity,
were hidden by her ornaments.

She stopped suddenly, caught the chain of mosaics and settled it hastily
in its place, flung down her castanets, drew herself back, and stood
looking at him, with her head a little on one side, and her eyes
narrowing in the way he had known so long and well.

"What is the matter, Cousin Elsie?  What do you stop for?"  he said.

Elsie did not answer, but kept her eyes on him, full of malicious light.
The jealousy which lay covered up under his surface-thoughts took this
opportunity to break out.

"You would n't act so, if you were dancing with Mr. Langdon,--would you,
Elsie?" he asked.

It was with some effort that he looked steadily at her to see the effect
of his question.

Elsie colored,--not much, but still perceptibly.  Dick could not remember
that he had ever seen her show this mark of emotion before, in all his
experience of her fitful changes of mood.  It had a singular depth of
significance, therefore, for him; he knew how hardly her color came.
Blushing means nothing, in some persons; in others, it betrays a profound
inward agitation,--a perturbation of the feelings far more trying than
the passions which with many easily moved persons break forth in tears.
All who have observed much are aware that some men, who have seen a good
deal of life in its less chastened aspects and are anything but modest,
will blush often and easily, while there are delicate and sensitive women
who can faint, or go into fits, if necessary, but are very rarely seen to
betray their feelings in their cheeks, even when their expression shows
that their inmost soul is blushing scarlet.  Presently she answered,
abruptly and scornfully,  "Mr. Langdon is a gentleman, and would not vex
me as you do."

"A gentleman!"  Dick answered, with the most insulting accent,--"a
gentleman!  Come, Elsie, you 've got the Dudley blood in your veins, and
it does n't do for you to call this poor, sneaking schoolmaster a
gentleman!"

He stopped short.  Elsie's bosom was heaving, the faint flush on her
cheek was becoming a vivid glow.  Whether it were shame or wrath, he saw
that he had reached some deep-lying centre of emotion.  There was no
longer any doubt in his mind.  With another girl these signs of confusion
might mean little or nothing; with her they were decisive and final.
Elsie Venner loved Bernard Langdon.

The sudden conviction, absolute, overwhelming, which rushed upon him, had
well-nigh led to an explosion of wrath, and perhaps some terrible scene
which might have fulfilled some of old Sophy's predictions. This,
however, would never do.  Dick's face whitened with his thoughts, but he
kept still until he could speak calmly.

"I've nothing against the young fellow," he said; "only I don't think
there's anything quite good enough to keep the company of people that
have the Dudley blood in them.  You a'n't as proud as I am.  I can't
quite make up my mind to call a schoolmaster a gentleman, though this one
may be well enough.  I 've nothing against him, at any rate."

Elsie made no answer, but glided out of the room and slid away to her own
apartment.  She bolted the door and drew her curtains close. Then she
threw herself on the floor, and fell into a dull, slow ache of passion,
without tears, without words, almost without thoughts. So she remained,
perhaps, for a half-hour, at the end of which time it seemed that her
passion had become a sullen purpose.  She arose, and, looking cautiously
round, went to the hearth, which was ornamented with curious old Dutch
tiles, with pictures of Scripture subjects.  One of these represented the
lifting of the brazen serpent.  She took a hair-pin from one of her
braids, and, insinuating its points under the edge of the tile, raised it
from its place.  A small leaden box lay under the tile, which she opened,
and, taking from it a little white powder, which she folded in a scrap of
paper, replaced the box and the tile over it.

Whether Dick had by any means got a knowledge of this proceeding, or
whether he only suspected some unmentionable design on her part, there is
no sufficient means of determining.  At any rate, when they met, an hour
or two after these occurrences, he could not help noticing how easily she
seemed to have got over her excitement.  She was very pleasant with
him,--too pleasant, Dick thought.  It was not Elsie's way to come out of
a fit of anger so easily as that.  She had contrived some way of letting
off her spite; that was certain.  Dick was pretty cunning, as old Sophy
had said, and, whether or not he had any means of knowing Elsie's private
intentions, watched her closely, and was on his guard against accidents.

For the first time, he took certain precautions with reference to his
diet, such as were quite alien to his common habits.  On coming to the
dinner-table, that day, he complained of headache, took but little food,
and refused the cup of coffee which Elsie offered him, saying that it did
not agree with him when he had these attacks.

Here was a new complication.  Obviously enough, he could not live in this
way, suspecting everything but plain bread and water, and hardly feeling
safe in meddling with them.  Not only had this school-keeping wretch come
between him and the scheme by which he was to secure his future fortune,
but his image had so infected his cousin's mind that she was ready to try
on him some of those tricks which, as he had heard hinted in the village,
she had once before put in practice upon a person who had become odious
to her.

Something must be done, and at once, to meet the double necessities of
this case.  Every day, while the young girl was in these relations with
the young man, was only making matters worse.  They could exchange words
and looks, they could arrange private interviews, they would be stooping
together over the same book, her hair touching his cheek, her breath
mingling with his, all the magnetic attractions drawing them together
with strange, invisible effluences.  As her passion for the schoolmaster
increased, her dislike to him, her cousin, would grow with it, and all
his dangers would be multiplied. It was a fearful point he had, reached.
He was tempted at one moment to give up all his plans and to disappear
suddenly from the place, leaving with the schoolmaster, who had come
between him and his object, an anonymous token of his personal sentiments
which would be remembered a good while in the history of the town of
Rockland.  This was but a momentary thought; the great Dudley property
could not be given up in that way.

Something must happen at once to break up all this order of things. He
could think of but one Providential event adequate to the emergency,--an
event foreshadowed by various recent circumstances, but hitherto floating
in his mind only as a possibility.  Its occurrence would at once change
the course of Elsie's feelings, providing her with something to think of
besides mischief, and remove the accursed obstacle which was thwarting
all his own projects. Every possible motive, then,--his interest, his
jealousy, his longing for revenge, and now his fears for his own
safety,--urged him to regard the happening of a certain casualty as a
matter of simple necessity.  This was the self-destruction of Mr. Bernard
Langdon.

Such an event, though it might be surprising to many people, would not be
incredible, nor without many parallel cases.  He was poor, a miserable
fag, under the control of that mean wretch up there at the school, who
looked as if he had sour buttermilk in his veins instead of blood.  He
was in love with a girl above his station, rich, and of old family, but
strange in all her ways, and it was conceivable that he should become
suddenly jealous of her.  Or she might have frightened him with some
display of her peculiarities which had filled him with a sudden
repugnance in the place of love.  Any of these things were credible, and
would make a probable story enough,--so thought Dick over to himself
with the New-England half of his mind.

Unfortunately, men will not always take themselves out of the way when,
so far as their neighbors are concerned, it would be altogether the most
appropriate and graceful and acceptable service they could render.  There
was at this particular moment no special reason for believing that the
schoolmaster meditated any violence to his own person.  On the contrary,
there was good evidence that he was taking some care of himself.  He was
looking well and in good spirits, and in the habit of amusing himself and
exercising, as if to keep up his standard of health, especially of taking
certain evening-walks, before referred to, at an hour when most of the
Rockland people had "retired," or, in vulgar language, "gone to bed."

Dick Veneer settled it, however, in his own mind, that Mr. Bernard
Langdon must lay violent hands upon himself.  He even went so far as to
determine the precise hour, and the method in which the "rash act," as it
would undoubtedly be called in the next issue of "The Rockland Weekly
Universe," should be committed.  Time,--this evening. Method, asphyxia,
by suspension.  It was, unquestionably, taking a great liberty with a man
to decide that he should become felo de se without his own consent.
Such, however, was the decision of Mr. Richard Veneer with regard to Mr.
Bernard Langdon.

If everything went right, then, there would be a coroner's inquest
to-morrow upon what remained of that gentleman, found suspended to the
branch of a tree somewhere within a mile of the Apollinean Institute.
The "Weekly Universe" would have a startling paragraph announcing a "SAD
EVENT!!!" which had "thrown the town into an intense state of excitement.
Mr. Barnard Langden, a well-known teacher at the Appolinian Institute,
was found, etc., etc.  The vital spark was extinct.  The motive to the
rash act can only be conjectured, but is supposed to be disappointed
affection.  The name of an accomplished young lady of the highest
respectability and great beauty is mentioned in connection with this
melancholy occurrence."

Dick Venner was at the tea-table that evening, as usual.--No, he would
take green tea, if she pleased,--the same that her father drank.  It
would suit his headache better.--Nothing,--he was much obliged to her.
He would help himself,--which he did in a little different way from
common, naturally enough, on account of his headache.  He noticed that
Elsie seemed a little nervous while she was rinsing some of the teacups
before their removal.

"There's something going on in that witch's head," he said to himself.
"I know her,--she 'd be savage now, if she had n't got some trick in
hand.  Let 's see how she looks to-morrow!"

Dick announced that he should go to bed early that evening, on account of
this confounded headache which had been troubling him so much.  In fact,
he went up early, and locked his door after him, with as much noise as he
could make.  He then changed some part of his dress, so that it should be
dark throughout, slipped off his boots, drew the lasso out from the
bottom of the contents of his trunk, and, carrying that and his boots in
his hand, opened his door softly, locked it after him, and stole down the
back-stairs, so as to get out of the house unnoticed.  He went straight
to the stable and saddled the mustang.  He took a rope from the stable
with him, mounted his horse, and set forth in the direction of the
Institute.

Mr. Bernard, as we have seen, had not been very profoundly impressed by
the old Doctor's cautions,--enough, however, to follow out some of his
hints which were not troublesome to attend to.  He laughed at the idea of
carrying a loaded pistol about with him; but still it seemed only fair,
as the old Doctor thought so much of the matter, to humor him about it.
As for not going about when and where he liked, for fear he might have
some lurking enemy, that was a thing not to be listened to nor thought
of.  There was nothing to be ashamed of or troubled about in any of his
relations with the school-girls.  Elsie, no doubt, showed a kind of
attraction towards him, as did perhaps some others; but he had been
perfectly discreet, and no father or brother or lover had any just cause
of quarrel with him.  To be sure, that dark young man at the Dudley
mansion-house looked as if he were his enemy, when he had met him; but
certainly there was nothing in their relations to each other, or in his
own to Elsie, that would be like to stir such malice in his mind as would
lead him to play any of his wild Southern tricks at his, Mr. Bernard's,
expense.  Yet he had a vague feeling that this young man was dangerous,
and he had been given to understand that one of the risks he ran was from
that quarter.

On this particular evening, he had a strange, unusual sense of some
impending peril.  His recent interview with the Doctor, certain remarks
which had been dropped in his hearing, but above all an unaccountable
impression upon his spirits, all combined to fill his mind with a
foreboding conviction that he was very near some overshadowing danger.
It was as the chill of the ice-mountain toward which the ship is steering
under full sail.  He felt a strong impulse to see Helen Darley and talk
with her.  She was in the common parlor, and, fortunately, alone.

"Helen," he said,--for they were almost like brother and sister now,--"I
have been thinking what you would do, if I should have to leave the
school at short notice, or be taken away suddenly by any accident."

"Do?" she said, her cheek growing paler than its natural delicate
hue,--"why, I do not know how I could possibly consent to live here, if
you left us.  Since you came, my life has been almost easy; before, it
was getting intolerable.  You must not talk about going, my dear friend;
you have spoiled me for my place.  Who is there here that I can have any
true society with, but you?  You would not leave us for another school,
would you?"

"No, no, my dear Helen," Mr. Bernard said, "if it depends on myself, I
shall stay out my full time, and enjoy your company and friendship. But
everything is uncertain in this world.  I have been thinking that I might
be wanted elsewhere, and called when I did not think of it;--it was a
fancy, perhaps,--but I can't keep it out of my mind this evening.  If any
of my fancies should come true, Helen, there are two or three messages I
want to leave with you.  I have marked a book or two with a cross in
pencil on the fly-leaf;--these are for you. There is a little hymn-book I
should like to have you give to Elsie from me;--it may be a kind of
comfort to the poor girl."

Helen's eyes glistened as she interrupted him,--

"What do you mean?  You must not talk so, Mr. Langdon.  Why, you never
looked better in your life.  Tell me now, you are not in earnest, are
you, but only trying a little sentiment on me?"

Mr. Bernard smiled, but rather sadly.

"About half in earnest," he said.  "I have had some fancies in my
head,--superstitions, I suppose,--at any rate, it does no harm to tell
you what I should like to have done, if anything should happen,--very
likely nothing ever will.  Send the rest of the books home, if you
please, and write a letter to my mother.  And, Helen, you will find one
small volume in my desk enveloped and directed, you will see to
whom;--give this with your own hands; it is a keepsake."

The tears gathered in her eyes; she could not speak at first. Presently,
"Why, Bernard, my dear friend, my brother, it cannot be that you are in
danger?  Tell me what it is, and, if I can share it with you, or counsel
you in any way, it will only be paying back the great debt I owe you.
No, no,--it can't be true,--you are tired and worried, and your spirits
have got depressed.  I know what that is;--I was sure, one winter, that
I should die before spring; but I lived to see the dandelions and
buttercups go to seed.  Come, tell me it was nothing but your
imagination."

She felt a tear upon her cheek, but would not turn her face away from
him; it was the tear of a sister.

"I am really in earnest, Helen," he said.  "I don't know that there is
the least reason in the world for these fancies.  If they all go off and
nothing comes of them, you may laugh at me, if you like.  But if there
should be any occasion, remember my requests.  You don't believe in
presentiments, do you?"

"Oh, don't ask-me, I beg you," Helen answered.  "I have had a good many
frights for every one real misfortune I have suffered. Sometimes I have
thought I was warned beforehand of coming trouble, just as many people
are of changes in the weather, by some unaccountable feeling,--but not
often, and I don't like to talk about such things.  I wouldn't think
about these fancies of yours.  I don't believe you have exercised
enough;--don't you think it's confinement in the school has made you
nervous?"

"Perhaps it has; but it happens that I have thought more of exercise
lately, and have taken regular evening walks, besides playing my old
gymnastic tricks every day."

They talked on many subjects, but through all he said Helen perceived a
pervading tone of sadness, and an expression as of a dreamy foreboding of
unknown evil.  They parted at the usual hour, and went to their several
rooms.  The sadness of Mr. Bernard had sunk into the heart of Helen, and
she mingled many tears with her prayers that evening, earnestly
entreating that he might be comforted in his days of trial and protected
in his hour of danger.

Mr. Bernard stayed in his room a short time before setting out for his
evening walk.  His eye fell upon the Bible his mother had given him when
he left home, and he opened it in the New Testament at a venture.  It
happened that the first words he read were these,--"Lest, coming
suddenly, he find you sleeping."  In the state of mind in which he was at
the moment, the text startled him.  It was like a supernatural warning.
He was not going to expose himself to any particular danger this evening;
a walk in a quiet village was as free from risk as Helen Darley or his
own mother could ask; yet he had an unaccountable feeling of
apprehension, without any definite object. At this moment he remembered
the old Doctor's counsel, which he had sometimes neglected, and, blushing
at the feeling which led him to do it, he took the pistol his suspicious
old friend had forced upon him, which he had put away loaded, and,
thrusting it into his pocket, set out upon his walk.

The moon was shining at intervals, for the night was partially clouded.
There seemed to be nobody stirring, though his attention was unusually
awake, and he could hear the whirr of the bats overhead, and the
pulsating croak of the frogs in the distant pools and marshes.  Presently
he detected the sound of hoofs at some distance, and, looking forward,
saw a horseman coming in his direction.  The moon was under a cloud at
the moment, and he could only observe that the horse and his rider looked
like a single dark object, and that they were moving along at an easy
pace.  Mr. Bernard was really ashamed of himself, when he found his hand
on the butt of his pistol.  When the horseman was within a hundred and
fifty yards of him, the moon shone out suddenly and revealed each of them
to the other.  The rider paused for a moment, as if carefully surveying
the pedestrian, then suddenly put his horse to the full gallop, and
dashed towards him, rising at the same instant in his stirrups and
swinging something round his head, what, Mr. Bernard could not make out.
It was a strange manoeuvre,--so strange and threatening in aspect that
the young man forgot his nervousness in an instant, cocked his pistol,
and waited to see what mischief all this meant. He did not wait long.  As
the rider came rushing towards him, he made a rapid motion and something
leaped five-and-twenty feet through the air, in Mr. Bernard's direction.
In an instant he felt a ring, as of a rope or thong, settle upon his
shoulders.  There was no time to think, he would be lost in another
second.  He raised his pistol and fired,--not at the rider, but at the
horse.  His aim was true; the mustang gave one bound and fell lifeless,
shot through the head.  The lasso was fastened to his saddle, and his
last bound threw Mr. Bernard violently to the earth, where he lay
motionless, as if stunned.

In the mean time, Dick Venner, who had been dashed down with his horse,
was trying to extricate himself,--one of his legs being held fast under
the animal, the long spur on his boot having caught in the saddle-cloth.
He found, however, that he could do nothing with his right arm, his
shoulder having been in some way injured in his fall. But his Southern
blood was up, and, as he saw Mr. Bernard move as if he were coming to his
senses, he struggled violently to free himself.

"I 'll have the dog, yet," he said,--"only let me get at him with the
knife!"

He had just succeeded in extricating his imprisoned leg, and was ready to
spring to his feet, when he was caught firmly by the throat, and looking
up, saw a clumsy barbed weapon, commonly known as a hay fork, within an
inch of his breast.

"Hold on there!  What 'n thunder 'r' y' abaout, y' darned Portagee?" said
a voice, with a decided nasal tone in it, but sharp and resolute.

Dick looked from the weapon to the person who held it, and saw a sturdy,
plain man standing over him, with his teeth clinched, and his aspect that
of one all ready for mischief.

"Lay still, naow!" said Abel Stebbins, the Doctor's man; "'f y' don't,
I'll stick ye, 'z sure 'z y' 'r' alive!  I been arfter ye f'r a week, 'n'
I got y' naow!  I knowed I'd ketch ye at some darned trick or 'nother
'fore I'd done 'ith ye!"

Dick lay perfectly still, feeling that he was crippled and helpless,
thinking all the time with the Yankee half of his mind what to do about
it.  He saw Mr. Bernard lift his head and look around him.  He would get
his senses again in a few minutes, very probably, and then he, Mr.
Richard Venner, would be done for.

"Let me up! let me up!" he cried, in a low, hurried voice,--"I 'll give
you a hundred dollars in gold to let me go.  The man a'n't hurt,--don't
you see him stirring?  He'll come to himself in two minutes.  Let me up!
I'll give you a hundred and fifty dollars in gold, now, here on the
spot,--and the watch out of my pocket; take it yourself, with your own
hands!"

"I'll see y' darned fust!  Ketch me lett'n' go!" was Abel's emphatic
answer.  "Yeou lay still, 'n' wait t'll that man comes tew."

He kept the hay-fork ready for action at the slightest sign of
resistance.

Mr. Bernard, in the mean time, had been getting, first his senses, and
then some few of his scattered wits, a little together.

"What is it?"--he said.  "Who'shurt?  What's happened?"

"Come along here 'z quick 'z y' ken," Abel answered, "'n' haalp me fix
this fellah.  Y' been hurt, y'rself, 'n' the' 's murder come pooty nigh
happenin'."

Mr. Bernard heard the answer, but presently stared about and asked again,
"Who's hurt?  What's happened?"

"Y' 'r' hurt, y'rself, I tell ye," said Abel; "'n' the' 's been a murder,
pooty nigh."

Mr. Bernard felt something about his neck, and, putting his hands up,
found the loop of the lasso, which he loosened, but did not think to slip
over his head, in the confusion of his perceptions and thoughts. It was a
wonder that it had not choked him, but he had fallen forward so as to
slacken it.

By this time he was getting some notion of what he was about, and
presently began looking round for his pistol, which had fallen.  He found
it lying near him, cocked it mechanically, and walked, somewhat
unsteadily, towards the two men, who were keeping their position as still
as if they were performing in a tableau.

"Quick, naow!" said Abel, who had heard the click of cocking the pistol,
and saw that he held it in his hand, as he came towards him. "Gi' me that
pistil, and yeou fetch that 'ere rope layin' there.  I 'll have this here
fella,h fixed 'n less 'n two minutes."

Mr. Bernard did as Abel said,--stupidly and mechanically, for he was but
half right as yet.  Abel pointed the pistol at Dick's head.

"Naow hold up y'r hands, yeou fellah," he said, "'n' keep 'em up, while
this man puts the rope mound y'r wrists."

Dick felt himself helpless, and, rather than have his disabled arm
roughly dealt with, held up his hands.  Mr. Bernard did as Abel said; he
was in a purely passive state, and obeyed orders like a child. Abel then
secured the rope in a most thorough and satisfactory complication of
twists and knots.

"Naow get up, will ye?" he said; and the unfortunate Dick rose to his
feet.

"Who's hurt?  What's happened?"  asked poor Mr. Bernard again, his memory
having been completely jarred out of him for the time.

"Come, look here naow, yeou, don' Stan' askin' questions over 'n'
over;--'t beats all! ha'n't I tol' y' a dozen times?"

As Abel spoke, he turned and looked at Mr. Bernard.

"Hullo!  What 'n thunder's that 'ere raoun' y'r neck?  Ketched ye 'ith a
slippernoose, hey?  Wal, if that a'n't the craowner!  Hol' on a minute,
Cap'n, 'n' I'll show ye what that 'ere halter's good for."

Abel slipped the noose over Mr. Bernard's head, and put it round the neck
of the miserable Dick Veneer, who made no sign of resistance,--whether
on account of the pain he was in, or from mere helplessness, or because
he was waiting for some unguarded moment to escape,--since resistance
seemed of no use.

"I 'm go'n' to kerry y' home," said Abel; "'T' th' ol Doctor, he's got a
gre't cur'osity t' see ye.  Jes' step along naow,--off that way, will
ye?--'n' I Ill hol' on t' th' bridle, f' fear y' sh'd run away."

He took hold of the leather thong, but found that it was fastened at the
other end to the saddle.  This was too much for Abel.

"Wal, naow, yeou be a pooty chap to hev raound!  A fellah's neck in a
slippernoose at one eend of a halter, 'n' a hors on th' full spring at t'
other eend!"

He looked at him from' head to foot as a naturalist inspects a new
specimen.  His clothes had suffered in his fall, especially on the leg
which had been caught under the horse.

"Hullo! look o' there, naow!  What's that 'ere stickin' aout o' y'r
boot?"

It was nothing but the handle of an ugly knife, which Abel instantly
relieved him of.

The party now took up the line of march for old Doctor Kittredge's house,
Abel carrying the pistol and knife, and Mr. Bernard walking in silence,
still half-stunned, holding the hay-fork, which Abel had thrust into his
hand.  It was all a dream to him as yet.  He remembered the horseman
riding at him, and his firing the pistol; but whether he was alive, and
these walls around him belonged to the village of Rockland, or whether he
had passed the dark river, and was in a suburb of the New Jerusalem, he
could not as yet have told.

They were in the street where the Doctor's house was situated.

"I guess I'll fire off one o' these here berrils," said Abel.

He fired.

Presently there was a noise of opening windows, and the nocturnal
head-dresses of Rockland flowered out of them like so many developments
of the Nightblooming Cereus.  White cotton caps and red bandanna
handkerchiefs were the prevailing forms of efflorescence. The main point
was that the village was waked up.  The old Doctor always waked easily,
from long habit, and was the first among those who looked out to see what
had happened.

"Why, Abel!" he called out, "what have you got there? and what 's all
this noise about?"

"We've ketched the Portagee!"  Abel answered, as laconically as the hero
of Lake Erie, in his famous dispatch.  "Go in there, you fellah!"

The prisoner was marched into the house, and the Doctor, who had
bewitched his clothes upon him in a way that would have been miraculous
in anybody but a physician, was down in presentable form as soon as if it
had been a child in a fit that he was sent for.

"Richard Veneer!" the Doctor exclaimed.  "What is the meaning of all
this?  Mr. Langdon, has anything happened to you?"

Mr. Bernard put his hand to his head.

"My mind is confused," he said.  "I've had a fall.--Oh, yes!--wait a
minute and it will all come back to me."

"Sit down, sit down," the Doctor said.  "Abel will tell me about it.
Slight concussion of the brain.  Can't remember very well for an hour or
two,--will come right by to-morrow."

"Been stunded," Abel said.  "He can't tell nothin'."

Abel then proceeded to give a Napoleonic bulletin of the recent combat of
cavalry and infantry and its results,--none slain, one captured.

The Doctor looked at the prisoner through his spectacles.

"What 's the matter with your shoulder, Venner?"

Dick answered sullenly, that he didn't know, fell on it when his horse
came down.  The Doctor examined it as carefully as he could through his
clothes.

"Out of joint.  Untie his hands, Abel"

By this time a small alarm had spread among the neighbors, and there was
a circle around Dick, who glared about on the assembled honest people
like a hawk with a broken wing.

When the Doctor said, "Untie his hands," the circle widened perceptibly.

"Isn't it a leetle rash to give him the use of his hands?  I see there's
females and children standin' near."

This was the remark of our old friend, Deacon Soper, who retired from the
front row, as he spoke, behind a respectable-looking, but somewhat
hastily dressed person of the defenceless sex, the female help of a
neighboring household, accompanied by a boy, whose unsmoothed shock of
hair looked like a last year's crow's-nest.

But Abel untied his hands, in spite of the Deacon's considerate
remonstrance.

"Now," said the Doctor, "the first thing is to put the joint back."

"Stop," said Deacon Soper,--"stop a minute.  Don't you think it will be
safer--for the women-folks--jest to wait till mornin', afore you put that
j'int into the socket?"

Colonel Sprowle, who had been called by a special messenger, spoke up at
this moment.

"Let the women-folks and the deacons go home, if they're scared, and put
the fellah's j'int in as quick as you like.  I 'll resk him, j'int in or
out."

"I want one of you to go straight down to Dudley Venner's with a
message," the Doctor said.  "I will have the young man's shoulder in
quick enough."

"Don't send that message!" said Dick, in a hoarse voice;--"do what you
like with my arm, but don't send that message!  Let me go,--I can walk,
and I'll be off from this place.  There's nobody hurt but myself.  Damn
the shoulder!--let me go!  You shall never hear of me again!"

Mr. Bernard came forward.

"My friends," he said, "I am not injured,--seriously, at least.  Nobody
need complain against this man, if I don't.  The Doctor will treat him
like a human being, at any rate; and then, if he will go, let him.  There
are too many witnesses against him here for him to want to stay."

The Doctor, in the mean time, without saying a word to all this, had got
a towel round the shoulder and chest and another round the arm, and had
the bone replaced in a very few minutes.

"Abel, put Cassia into the new chaise," he said, quietly.  "My friends
and neighbors, leave this young man to me."

"Colonel Sprowle, you're a justice of the peace," said Deacon Soper, "and
you know what the law says in cases like this.  It a'n't so clear that it
won't have to come afore the Grand Jury, whether we will or no."

"I guess we'll set that j'int to-morrow mornin'," said Colonel
Sprowle,--which made a laugh at the Deacon's expense, and virtually
settled the question.

"Now trust this young man in my care," said the old Doctor, "and go home
and finish your naps.  I knew him when he was a boy and I'll answer for
it, he won't trouble you any more.  The Dudley blood makes folks proud, I
can tell you, whatever else they are."

The good people so respected and believed in the Doctor that they left
the prisoner with him.

Presently, Cassia, the fast Morgan mare, came up to the front-door, with
the wheels of the new, light chaise flashing behind her in the moonlight.
The Doctor drove Dick forty miles at a stretch that night, out of the
limits of the State.

"Do you want money?"  he said, before he left him.

Dick told him the secret of his golden belt.

"Where shall I send your trunk after you from your uncle's?"

Dick gave him a direction to a seaport town to which he himself was
going, to take passage for a port in South America.

"Good-bye, Richard," said the Doctor.  "Try to learn something from
to-night's lesson."

The Southern impulses in Dick's wild blood overcame him, and he kissed
the old Doctor on both cheeks, crying as only the children of the sun can
cry, after the first hours in the dewy morning of life. So Dick Venner
disappears from this story.  An hour after dawn, Cassia pointed her fine
ears homeward, and struck into her square, honest trot, as if she had not
been doing anything more than her duty during her four hours' stretch of
the last night.

Abel was not in the habit of questioning the Doctor's decisions.

"It's all right," he said to Mr. Bernard.  "The fellah 's Squire Venner's
relation, anyhaow.  Don't you want to wait here, jest a little while,
till I come back?  The's a consid'able nice saddle 'n' bridle on a dead
boss that's layin' daown there in the road 'n' I guess the' a'n't no use
in lettin' on 'em spite,--so I'll jest step aout 'n' fetch 'em along.  I
kind o' calc'late 't won't pay to take the cretur's shoes 'n' hide off
to-night,--'n' the' won't be much iron on that hose's huffs an haour
after daylight, I'll bate ye a quarter."

"I'll walk along with you," said Mr. Bernard; "I feel as if I could get
along well enough now."

So they set off together.  There was a little crowd round the dead
mustang already, principally consisting of neighbors who had adjourned
from the Doctor's house to see the scene of the late adventure.  In
addition to these, however, the assembly was honored by the presence of
Mr. Principal Silas Peckham, who had been called from his slumbers by a
message that Master Langdon was shot through the head by a
highway-robber, but had learned a true version of the story by this time.
His voice was at that moment heard above the rest,--sharp, but thin, like
bad cider-vinegar.

"I take charge of that property, I say.  Master Langdon 's actin' under
my orders, and I claim that hoss and all that's on him.  Hiram! jest slip
off that saddle and bridle, and carry 'em up to the Institoot, and bring
down a pair of pinchers and a file,--and--stop--fetch a pair of shears,
too; there's hosshair enough in that mane and tail to stuff a bolster
with."

"You let that hoss alone!" spoke up Colonel Sprowle.  "When a fellah goes
out huntin' and shoots a squirrel, do you think he's go'n' to let another
fellah pick him up and kerry him off?  Not if he's got a double-berril
gun, and t'other berril ha'n't been fired off yet!  I should like to see
the mahn that'll take off that seddle 'n' bridle, excep' the one th't hez
a fair right to the whole concern!"

Hiram was from one of the lean streaks in New Hampshire, and, not being
overfed in Mr. Silas Peckham's kitchen, was somewhat wanting in stamina,
as well as in stomach, for so doubtful an enterprise, as undertaking to
carry out his employer's orders in the face of the Colonel's defiance.

Just then Mr. Bernard and Abel came up together.  "Here they be," said
the Colonel.  "Stan' beck, gentlemen!"

Mr. Bernard, who was pale and still a little confused, but gradually
becoming more like himself, stood and looked in silence for a moment.

All his thoughts seemed to be clearing themselves in this interval. He
took in the whole series of incidents: his own frightful risk; the
strange, instinctive, nay, Providential impulse, which had led him so
suddenly to do the one only thing which could possibly have saved him;
the sudden appearance of the Doctor's man, but for which he might yet
have been lost; and the discomfiture and capture of his dangerous enemy.

It was all past now, and a feeling of pity rose in Mr. Bernard's heart.

"He loved that horse, no doubt," he said,--"and no wonder.  A beautiful,
wild--looking creature!  Take off those things that are on him, Abel, and
have them carried to Mr. Dudley Veneer's.  If he does not want them, you
may keep them yourself, for all that I have to say.  One thing more.  I
hope nobody will lift his hand against this noble creature to mutilate
him in any way.  After you have taken off the saddle and bridle, Abel,
bury him just as he is.  Under that old beech-tree will be a good place.
You'll see to it,--won't you, Abel?"

Abel nodded assent, and Mr. Bernard returned to the Institute, threw
himself in his clothes on the bed, and slept like one who is heavy with
wine.

Following Mr. Bernard's wishes, Abel at once took off the high-peaked
saddle and the richly ornamented bridle from the mustang.  Then, with the
aid of two or three others, he removed him to the place indicated.
Spades and shovels were soon procured, and before the moon had set, the
wild horse of the Pampas was at rest under the turf at the wayside, in
the far village among the hills of New England.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE NEWS REACHES THE DUDLEY MANSION.

Early the next morning Abel Stebbins made his appearance at Dudley
Veneer's, and requested to see the maan o' the haouse abaout somethin' o'
consequence.  Mr. Veneer sent word that the messenger should wait below,
and presently appeared in the study, where Abel was making himself at
home, as is the wont of the republican citizen, when he hides the purple
of empire beneath the apron of domestic service.

"Good mornin', Squire!" said Abel, as Mr. Venner entered.  "My name's
Stebbins, 'n' I'm stoppin' f'r a spell 'ith of Doctor Kittredge."

"Well, Stebbins," said Mr. Dudley Veneer, "have you brought any special
message from the Doctor?"

"Y' ha'n't heerd nothin